comment

Guidelines for human gene nomenclature
Standardized gene naming is crucial for effective communication about genes, and as genomics becomes
increasingly important in health care, the need for a consistent language to refer to human genes becomes ever
more essential. Here, we present the current HUGO Gene Nomenclature Committee (HGNC) guidelines for
naming not only protein-coding genes but also RNA genes and pseudogenes, and we outline the changes in
approach and ethos that have resulted from the discoveries of the past few decades.

Elspeth A. Bruford, Bryony Braschi, Paul Denny, Tamsin E. M. Jones, Ruth L. Seal and Susan Tweedie

T

he first guidelines for human gene
nomenclature were published in
1979 (ref. 1), when the Human Gene
Nomenclature Committee was originally
established and given the authority to
approve and implement standardized human
gene symbols and names. In 1989, the
Nomenclature Committee was placed under
the auspices of the newly founded Human
Genome Organization (HUGO) and thus
became the HUGO Gene Nomenclature
Committee (HGNC). Subsequent revisions
to the nomenclature guidelines were
published in 1987 (ref. 2), 1995 (ref. 3), 1997
(ref. 4) and 2002 (ref. 5). In the intervening
years, the HGNC has published online
updates to the guidelines to reflect the major
changes and the increase in knowledge
and data during this exciting period in
human genomics. More than 40,000 human
loci have been named by the HGNC
to date; approximately half of these are
protein-coding genes, and most resources
now agree that the human genome contains
around 19,000–20,000 protein-coding
genes, a range considerably lower than some
earlier estimates. Beyond the naming of
protein-coding genes, substantial progress
has been made in the nomenclature
of different classes of RNA genes and
pseudogenes. All approved human gene
symbols can be found in the online HGNC
database6 (https://www.genenames.org/).
The philosophy of the HGNC used to be
that gene nomenclature should evolve with
new technology and that symbol changes, if
supported by most researchers working on a
gene, would be considered if they reflected
new functional information. Since the
advent of clinical genomics, such changes
have much wider impact, and disseminating
nomenclature updates to all clinicians,
patients, charities and other parties
interested in genes is impossible. Therefore,
the stability of gene symbols, particularly
those associated with disease, is now a key
priority for the HGNC. Nevertheless, novel
information can be encapsulated in the gene
name without changing the gene symbol.
754

Because human gene symbols are
also routinely transferred to homologous
vertebrate genes, including in our sister
project, the Vertebrate Gene Nomenclature
Committee (VGNC), we now avoid
references to human-specific traits in
nomenclature whenever possible.
We strongly advise researchers to contact
us at hgnc@genenames.org whenever they
are considering naming a novel gene or
renaming an existing gene or group of genes,
for all locus types, not just protein-coding
genes. We are not always able to approve
the gene symbols requested, but we strive
to work with researchers to find acceptable
alternatives. Requesting an approved symbol
ensures that the published symbol will
appear in biomedical databases, including
our own and others. We further encourage
journal editors and reviewers to check that
approved nomenclature is being used and to
require authors to contact the HGNC about
any novel gene symbols before publication.
Submitters should bear in mind that the
HGNC is committed to making minimal
future changes to gene symbols and that
we do not take publication precedence into
account when approving nomenclature.
Readers should note that the following
are guidelines and recommendations (Box 1)
but not strict rules. We are aware of
numerous exceptional legacy symbols and
names that remain approved. The HGNC
considers the naming of each and every
gene on a case-by-case basis, and deviations
from these guidelines may be made given
sufficient evidence that the nomenclature
will ultimately aid in communication and
data retrieval.

Gene naming

For many years, the HGNC has maintained
the definition of a gene as “a DNA segment
that contributes to phenotype/function.
In the absence of demonstrated function,
a gene may be characterized by sequence,
transcription or homology.” Because there is
still no universally agreed-upon alternative,
we continue to use this definition.

Box 1 | Summary of the guidelines

1.
2.
3.
4.
5.

Each gene is assigned a unique symbol, HGNC ID and descriptive name.
Symbols contain only uppercase
Latin letters and Arabic numerals.
Symbols should not be the same as
commonly used abbreviations.
Nomenclature should not contain
references to any species or ‘G’ for
gene.
Nomenclature should not be offensive or pejorative.

Ideally, gene symbols are short,
memorable and pronounceable, and most
gene names are long-form descriptions of the
symbol. Names should be brief and specific,
and should convey something about the
character or function of the gene products
but not attempt to describe everything
known. Each gene is assigned only one
symbol; the HGNC does not routinely
name isoforms (that is, alternate transcripts
or splice variants). Therefore, there are
no separate symbols for protein-coding
or non-coding RNA (ncRNA) isoforms
of a protein-coding locus, or alternative
transcripts from an ncRNA locus (Box 2).
When authors wish to use their own
isoform notation, we advise stating clearly
that this notation denotes an isoform of a
particular gene and then quoting the HGNC
symbol for that gene.
In exceptional circumstances, in response
to community demand, separate symbols
have been approved for gene segments in
complex loci (for example, the UGT1 locus,
the clustered protocadherins at 5q31, and
the immunoglobulin and T-cell-receptor
families). Putative bicistronic loci may be
assigned separate symbols to represent
the distinct gene products (for example,
PYURF, ‘PIGY upstream reading frame’,
is encoded by the same transcript as
PIGY, ‘phosphatidylinositol glycan anchor
biosynthesis class Y’).

Nature Genetics | VOL 52 | August 2020 | 754–758 | www.nature.com/naturegenetics

comment
Box 2 | Cases for which HGNC does not provide official nomenclature

Sequence-variant nomenclature. This is
the responsibility of the Human Genome
Variation Society (HGVS)19, which provides
recommendations for defining variations in
DNA, RNA and protein sequences. HGVS
endorses the use of HGNC gene symbols
within their notation.
Products of gene translocations or
fusions. We are not aware of official naming
guidelines for these. SYMBOL1-SYMBOL2
is widely used, but we use this format for
readthrough transcripts (as described in
the main text), and hence we specifically
recommend not using this format for
translocations or fusions. We recommend
the format SYMBOL1/SYMBOL2, which
has been used in some publications (for
example, BCR/ABL1).
Protein nomenclature. We have no
authority over naming proteins, but we
Table 1 summarizes key factors
considered when assigning gene
nomenclature. Additionally, Supplementary
Table 1 lists characters recommended
for specific usage in gene symbols,
Supplementary Table 2 highlights specific
conventions used in gene names, and
Supplementary Tables 3 and 4 provide
Greek-to-Latin alphabet conversions
and single-letter amino acid symbols,
respectively.

Gene naming by biotype

Protein-coding genes. We aim to name
protein-coding genes on the basis of a key
normal function of the gene product. Many
protein-coding genes of known function are
named in collaboration with internationally
recognized bodies composed of experts in a
specific field. Where possible, related genes
are named by using a common root symbol
to enable grouping, typically on the basis
of sequence homology, shared function or
membership in protein complexes.
Gene group members should be
designated by Arabic numerals placed
immediately after the root symbol (for
example, KLF1, KLF2 and KLF3). More
rarely, single-letter suffixes may be used (for
example, LDHA, LDHB and LDHC). Some
large gene families may include a variety of
number and letter combinations to indicate
subgroupings (for example, the cytochrome
P450 superfamily members CYP1A1,
CYP21A2 and CYP51A1).
For genes involved in specific immune
processes, or for those encoding an

coordinate closely with specialist groups
that name specific subsets of proteins, such
as the Enzyme Commission. The recently
devised International Protein Nomenclature
Guidelines (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
genome/doc/internatprot_nomenguide/)
were written with the involvement of the
HGNC. In agreement with these guidelines,
we recommend that “protein and gene
symbols should use the same abbreviation.”
We further advise referring to proteins
by using non-italic gene symbols, to
distinguish them from genes.
Nomenclature for regulatory
genomic elements. These elements
include promoters, enhancers and
transcription-factor-binding sites. We
also do not provide nomenclature for
transposable-element insertions in the
human genome. Protein-coding and
lncRNA genes that fit the criteria outlined in

Mayer et al.20 may be named as endogenous
retrovirus (ERV)-derived genes, but ERV
insertions will not be named.
Nomenclature for human loci associated
with clinical phenotypes and complex
traits. Although HGNC historically named
these loci, this activity has been taken
over by Online Mendelian Inheritance in
Man (OMIM)21. All HGNC entries with
the locus type ‘phenotype only’ now have
the status ‘entry withdrawn’. Note that
some uncharacterized genes shown to be
causative for a specific phenotype have
adopted the phenotype symbol and name.
If these phenotypic symbols have become
entrenched in the literature, we aim to
update the corresponding gene names to
reflect an aspect of the normal function
of the gene and its products (for example,
TSC1, ‘tuberous sclerosis 1’ is now TSC1,
‘TSC complex subunit 1’).

Table 1 | Key factors in assigning gene nomenclature
Gene symbols

Gene names

Must be unique within a given genome

Should be brief and specific

Must not be offensive or pejorative (ideally in any language)
Must not use superscripts or subscripts, or
punctuationa

Should minimize punctuation; commas, hyphens
and parentheses may be included for clarityb

Must contain only uppercasec Latin letters and
Arabic numerals

Must be written in American English

Must start with a letter

Must start with a lowercase letter (unless starting
with an eponym or capitalized abbreviation)

Should not include ‘G’ for gene, ‘H’ for human,
Roman numerals or Greek letters

Should not include the words ‘gene’ or ‘human’

Should not spell proper names or common
words or match commonly used abbreviations

Should start with the same letter as the symbol (to
facilitate alphabetical listing and grouping)

Should avoid duplicating symbols in other
species (unless orthologous)

Should not reference any species, taxa, tissue
specificity, molecular weight, chromosomal
location, human-specific features and phenotypes,
or familial terms

Should avoid using letters or combinations of
Descriptive modifiers usually follow the main part
letters that have specific meanings when used in of the name, to enable the use of a common root
gene symbols (Supplementary Table 1)
symbol for a gene group (for example, ACADM for
‘acyl-CoA dehydrogenase medium chain’ and ACADS
for ‘acyl-CoA dehydrogenase short chain’).
Supplementary Table 2 shows punctuation exceptions for gene symbols. bPunctuation exceptions are made for enzyme names. cSole
exception of C#orfs.

a

enzyme, receptor or ion channel, we
consult with specialist nomenclature groups
(Supplementary Note). For other major
gene groups, we consult a panel of advisors
when naming new members and discussing
proposed nomenclature updates. A list of
our specialist advisors is provided on our

Nature Genetics | VOL 52 | August 2020 | 754–758 | www.nature.com/naturegenetics

website6, and we welcome suggestions of
new experts for specific gene groups.
In the absence of functional data,
protein-coding genes may be named in the
following ways. (1) Naming may be based
on recognized structural domains and
motifs encoded by the gene (for example,
755

comment
HGNC process for naming lncRNAs
1. Has a function or key
characteristic been published?

Yes
• Evaluate possible symbols
• Discuss alternatives with researchers
• Choose a suitable unique symbol

No
Yes

Assign symbol format
[microRNA symbol]HG

e.g., XIST, CEROX1

2. Does it contain a microRNA
gene in an intron or exon?
No

MIR22HG
MIR22

3. Does it contain a snoRNA
gene in an intron or exon?

Yes

Assign root format SNHG#
(small nucleolar host gene)

No
Yes

Assign symbol format
[PC symbol]-DT

SNHG25
SNORD104

4. Does it share a bidirectional
promoter with a PC gene?
No

DDX33-DT
DDX33

5. Does it reside entirely within
an intron of a PC gene?

Yes

No
Assign symbol format
[PC symbol]-OT#

Yes

ITPKB-IT1
ITPKB

6. Does it overlap a PC gene
on the same strand?
No

SPANXA2-OT1
SPANXA2

7. Does it overlap a PC gene
on the opposite strand?

Yes

No
Assign root format LINC#
(long intergenic non-protein-coding RNA),
where # is a unique five-digit number

Assign symbol format
[PC symbol]-IT#

Yes

8. The lncRNA gene is intergenic
with respect to PC genes

Assign symbol format
[PC symbol]-AS#
CERS3-AS1
CERS3

LINC02850

Fig. 1 | The HGNC’s systematic process for naming lncRNA genes. In the absence of suitable published information, lncRNA genes are named on the basis
of genomic context. HG, host gene; PC, protein coding; DT, divergent transcript (used for lncRNA genes that share a promoter with a PC gene); IT, intronic
transcript; OT, overlapping transcript; AS, antisense RNA; LINC, long intergenic non-protein-coding RNA.

ABHD1, ‘abhydrolase domain containing 1’;
HEATR1, ‘HEAT repeat containing 1’).
Because these features can provide
insight into the character of the gene
product, this type of symbol is commonly
retained even after the normal function
of the gene product has been elucidated,
although further information may be
added to the gene name. (2) Naming may
be based on homologous genes within
the human genome. When naming is
based on characterized homologs, genes
of unknown function are given the next
symbol within a designated series but with
a different gene-name format (for example,
CASTOR3 is ‘CASTOR family member 3’
rather than ‘cytosolic arginine sensor for
mTORC1 subunit 3’). The placeholder
root symbol FAM (‘family with sequence
similarity’) is used when no information is
available for any of the homologous genes.
756

Each homologous family has a unique
FAM number (for example, FAM3), and
each family member is distinguished by a
letter or letter and number (for example,
FAM3A or FAM3C2P). Of note, this root
can be applied to both protein-coding and
non-coding gene families. (3) Naming
may be based on homologous genes from
another species. If there is a one-to-one
ortholog, the same or equivalent symbol
will be approved (for example, human
CDC45, ‘cell division cycle 45’, based on
S. cerevisiae CDC45). A unique number
or letter suffix is added if there is more
than one human homolog (for example,
UNC45A and UNC45B are co-orthologs of
Caenorhabditis elegans unc-45). Gene names
are updated to be appropriate for vertebrates
(for example, ‘unc-45 myosin chaperone’
instead of ‘UNCoordinated 45’). (4) Naming
may be based only on the presence of an

open reading frame. Genes of unknown
function that fit none of the above criteria
are designated by the chromosome of origin,
with the letters ‘orf ’ for open reading frame
(in lowercase to prevent confusion between
the letter ‘O’ and the numeral ‘0’, which may
be part of the chromosome number) and a
number in a series (for example, C3orf18,
‘chromosome 3 open reading frame 18’).
When the coding potential of the locus is
in doubt, we include the word ‘putative’ in
the name (for example, ‘chromosome 18
putative open reading frame 15’).
Historically, genes of unknown function
identified by the Human cDNA project at
the Kazusa DNA Research Institute7 have
been named by using the KIAA# identifiers
assigned by this project.
Pseudogenes. We define a pseudogene as
a sequence that is incapable of producing a

Nature Genetics | VOL 52 | August 2020 | 754–758 | www.nature.com/naturegenetics

comment
functional protein product but has a high
level of homology to a functional gene.
In general, we name only pseudogenes that
retain homology to a substantial proportion
of the functional ancestral gene.
Most pseudogenes are processed and
named after a specific parent gene (for
example, DPP3P1, ‘DPP3 pseudogene 1’).
Such pseudogene numbering is usually
species specific, and hence orthology cannot
be inferred from identical pseudogene
symbols in different species.
Pseudogenes retaining most of the coding
sequence as compared with other family
members, which are usually unprocessed,
are named as new family members with a
‘P’ suffix (for example, CBWD4P, ‘COBW
domain containing 4, pseudogene’).
This naming format is also used for
genes that are pseudogenized relative
to their functional ortholog in another
species (for example, ADAM24P, ‘ADAM
metallopeptidase domain 24, pseudogene’
is the pseudogenized ortholog of mouse
Adam24). In rare cases, such pseudogenes
do not include the ‘P’ if the symbol is well
established (for example, UOX, ‘urate
oxidase (pseudogene)’).
A small number of genes are currently
pseudogenized in the reference genome but
are known to have coding alleles segregating
in the population. Such loci are given the
locus type ‘protein-coding’ and are indicated
by ‘(gene/pseudogene)’ included at the end
of the gene name (for example, CASP12,
‘caspase 12 (gene/pseudogene)’).
Non-coding RNA genes. We name ncRNA
genes according to their RNA type, as
described in our recent review8. For small
RNAs for which an expert resource exists,
we follow the existing naming schema (for
example, miRBase9 for microRNAs and
the genomic tRNA database (GtRNAdb)10
for transfer RNAs). Other ncRNA classes,
such as small nuclear RNAs, are named in
collaboration with specialist advisors.
Long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs),
whenever possible, are named on the
basis of a key function or characteristic
of the encoded RNA. When functional
information is not available, a systematic
nomenclature is applied (Fig. 1).
Readthrough transcripts. Readthrough
transcripts are normally produced from
adjacent loci and include coding and/or
non-coding parts of two (or more) genes.
The HGNC names only readthrough
transcripts that are consistently annotated by
both the RefSeq annotators at the National
Center for Biotechnology Information
(NCBI)11 and the GENCODE annotators
at Ensembl12. These transcripts have the

Box 3 | Scenarios that may merit a symbol change

•

•

•

•

Adoption of a more appropriate or
commonly used alias. For example,
RNASEN was updated to DROSHA
(drosha ribonuclease III) because of
overwhelming community usage.
Domain- or motif-based nomenclature. For example, TMEM206 (transmembrane protein 206) is now PACC1
(proton activated chloride channel 1).
Phenotype- or disease-based
nomenclature. For example, CASC4
(cancer susceptibility candidate 4) was
renamed GOLM2 (golgi membrane
protein 2), removing reference to the
phenotype and making it consistent
with its paralog GOLM1.
Location-based nomenclature. For
example, TWISTNB (TWIST neighbor) is now POLR1F (RNA polymerase
I subunit F).

locus type ‘readthrough transcript’ and
are symbolized by using the two (or more)
symbols from the parent genes, separated
by a hyphen (for example, INS-IGF2) with
‘readthrough’ appended (for example,
‘INS-IGF2 readthrough’). The name may
include additional information about the
potential coding status of the transcript,
such as ‘(NMD candidate)’.
Gene segments. For specific complex loci,
the HGNC assigns symbols to individual
gene segments, solely on the basis of
community request. Examples include the
immunoglobulins and T-cell receptors, the
UGT1 locus and clustered protocadherins.
Genomic regions. The HGNC previously
named genomic regions referenced in the
literature (for example, XIC, ‘X chromosome
inactivation center’), and gene clusters
were assigned symbols suffixed with the ‘@’
character (for example, HOXA@, ‘homeobox
A cluster’). We no longer routinely provide
symbols for genomic regions, but some
symbols, such as those for fragile sites, have
been retained when they have been used in
publications, and this information would
otherwise be lost.

Genes found within subsets of the
population

Historically, the HGNC has approved
symbols for only genes in the human
reference genome. Rare exceptions have
been made when requested by particular
communities (for example, structural
variants within the HLA and KIR gene

Nature Genetics | VOL 52 | August 2020 | 754–758 | www.nature.com/naturegenetics

•

•

•

Pejorative symbols. For example,
DOPEY1 was renamed to
DOP1A (DOP1 leucine zipper like
protein A).
Misleading or incorrect nomenclature. For example, OTX3 was initially
erroneously named as an OTX family member and has been renamed
DMBX1 (diencephalon/mesencephalon homeobox 1).
Symbols that affect data handling and
retrieval. For example, all symbols that
autoconverted to dates in Microsoft
Excel have been changed (for example,
SEPT1 is now SEPTIN1; MARCH1 is
now MARCHF1); tRNA synthetase
symbols that were also common words
have been changed (for example,
WARS is now WARS1; CARS is now
CARS1).

families, both of which have dedicated
nomenclature committees). Future naming of
structural variants will be restricted to those
on alternate loci that have been incorporated
into the human reference genome by the
Genome Reference Consortium (GRC;
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/grc). The
underscore character is reserved for genes
annotated on alternate reference loci (for
example, GTF2H2C_2 is a second copy of
GTF2H2C on a 5q13.2 alternate reference
locus; APOBEC3A_B is a deletion hybrid
on a 22q13 alternate reference locus that
includes exons from both the APOBEC3A
and APOBEC3B parent genes).

Status

All HGNC gene records have a status: the
majority are ‘approved’, but when new
evidence shows that a previously named
gene is no longer considered to be real, the
entry’s status changes to ‘entry withdrawn’.
Whenever possible, we avoid reusing
symbols from ‘entry withdrawn’ records,
because doing so can cause considerable
confusion.

Naming across vertebrates

We recommend that orthologous genes
across vertebrate species (and, when
appropriate, non-vertebrate species) have
the same gene symbol.
The Vertebrate Gene Nomenclature
Committee. The VGNC (https://
vertebrate.genenames.org/) is an extension
of the HGNC responsible for assigning
standardized names to genes in vertebrate
757

comment
species that currently lack a nomenclature
committee. The VGNC coordinates with
the five established existing vertebrate
nomenclature committees—the Mouse
Genomic Nomenclature Committee
(MGNC)13, Rat Genome Nomenclature
Committee (RGNC; https://rgd.mcw.edu/
nomen/nomen.shtml), Chicken Gene
Nomenclature Consortium (CGNC)14,
Xenopus Nomenclature Committee (XNC)15
and Zebrafish Nomenclature Committee
(ZNC)16—to ensure that vertebrate genes are
named in line with their human homologs.
Orthologs of human C#orf# genes are
assigned the human gene symbol, with
the other species chromosome number
as a prefix and an ‘H’ denoting human.
Therefore, because the ortholog of human
C1orf100 is on cow chromosome 16, the
cow gene symbol is C16H1orf100, with the
corresponding gene name ‘chromosome 16
C1orf100 homolog’.
Gene families with a complex
evolutionary history should ideally be
named with the help of an expert in the
field, as has already been implemented for
the olfactory receptor17 and cytochrome
P450 gene families.
Species designation. To distinguish the
species of origin for homologous genes with
the same gene symbol, we recommend citing
the NCBI taxonomy ID18 as well as either
the current name or the GenBank common
name (for example, taxonomy ID 9598 and
either Pan troglodytes or chimpanzee).

Nomenclature updates

Although we are committed to minimizing
symbol changes, some updates will still be
appropriate. All requests for change are
considered on a case-by-case basis and
often involve community consultation. We
anticipate that most future changes will fall
into one of the following categories.
Symbol updates for placeholders.
FAMs, C#orfs and KIAAs are regarded
as placeholder symbols and updated
with structure- and/or function-based
designations whenever possible. However,

758

when specific placeholder symbols have
become entrenched in the literature, we may
make exceptions and retain the placeholder,
while updating the gene name (for example,
FAM20B has been retained with the updated
gene name ‘FAM20B glycosaminoglycan
xylosylkinase’).
Replacing underused and problematic
nomenclature. We may consider updating
symbols that have rarely or never been
published, are not suitable for transfer to
other vertebrates, and/or have been widely
used but could cause substantial problems
(examples in Box 3).
Gene-symbol usage. The HGNC endorses
the use of italics to denote genes, alleles
and RNAs, to distinguish them from
proteins.
We advise authors to quote the approved
gene symbol at least once in the abstract
of any publication. Every gene with an
approved symbol also has a unique HGNC
ID in the format HGNC:number (for
example, gene symbol BRAF, HGNC
ID HGNC:1097). Although we aim to
minimize symbol changes, some updates
are inevitable, and sometimes an approved
symbol can be used to denote a different
gene in the literature; therefore, we advise
quoting the HGNC ID for each gene to
avoid ambiguity. HGNC IDs are associated
with the gene sequence and do not change
unless the gene structure undergoes
extreme alteration (such as being merged
with another locus or split into multiple
loci). This association ensures effective and
reliable tracking of data regardless of any
nomenclature changes.
❐
Elspeth A. Bruford 1,2 ✉, Bryony Braschi1,
Paul Denny1, Tamsin E. M. Jones1,
Ruth L. Seal1,2 and Susan Tweedie 1

HUGO Gene Nomenclature Committee (HGNC),
European Molecular Biology Laboratory, European
Bioinformatics Institute, Wellcome Genome Campus,
Hinxton, UK. 2Department of Haematology,
University of Cambridge School of Clinical Medicine,
Cambridge, UK.
✉e-mail: elspeth@genenames.org

Published online: 3 August 2020
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41588-020-0669-3
References

1. Shows, T. B. et al. Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 25, 96–116 (1979).
2. Shows, T. B. et al. Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 46,
11–28 (1987).
3. McAlpine, P. Trends Genet. (Mar), 39–42 (1995).
4. White, J. A. et al. Genomics 45, 468–471 (1997).
5. Wain, H. M. et al. Genomics 79, 464–470 (2002).
6. Braschi, B. et al. Nucleic Acids Res. 47, D786–D792 (2019).
7. Nagase, T., Koga, H. & Ohara, O. Brief. Funct. Genomics Proteom.
5, 4–7 (2006).
8. Seal, R. L. et al. EMBO J. 39, e103777 (2020).
9. Kozomara, A., Birgaoanu, M. & Griffiths-Jones, S. Nucleic Acids
Res. 47, D155–D162 (2019).
10. Chan, P. P. & Lowe, T. M. Nucleic Acids Res. 44,
D184–D189 (2016).
11. O’Leary, N. A. et al. Nucleic Acids Res. 44, D733–D745 (2016).
12. Frankish, A. et al. Nucleic Acids Res. 47, D766–D773 (2019).
13. Maltais, L. J., Blake, J. A., Eppig, J. T. & Davisson, M. T. Genomics
45, 471–476 (1997).
14. Burt, D.W. et al. BMC Genomics 10 (Suppl. 2), S5 (2009).
15. James-Zorn, C. et al. Genesis 53, 486–497 (2015).
16. Ruzicka, L. et al. Nucleic Acids Res. 47, D867–D873 (2019).
17. Olender, T., Jones, T. E. M., Bruford, E. & Lancet, D. BMC Evol.
Biol. 20, 42 (2020).
18. Federhen, S. Nucleic Acids Res. 40, D136–D143 (2012).
19. den Dunnen, J. T. Methods Mol. Biol. 1492, 243–251 (2017).
20. Mayer, J., Blomberg, J. & Seal, R. L. Mob. DNA 2, 7 (2011).
21. Amberger, J. S., Bocchini, C. A., Scott, A. F. & Hamosh, A. Nucleic
Acids Res. 47, D1038–D1043 (2019).

Acknowledgements

We thank all current and former members of the HGNC
team, particularly the late professor Sue Povey, who was
HGNC’s principal investigator from 1996 to 2007, and our
specialist advisors and advisory-board members past and
present. The HGNC relies heavily on the expertise and
feedback of researchers, and we are grateful for all input
that we receive. The HGNC is currently funded by the
National Human Genome Research Institute (NHGRI)
grant U24HG003345 (to E.A.B.) and Wellcome Trust grant
208349/Z/17/Z (to E.A.B.).

Author contributions

E.A.B. directed and obtained funding for the project.
E.A.B., R.L.S. and S.T. wrote the original draft. E.A.B.,
R.L.S., S.T., B.B. and T.E.M.J. revised the manuscript.
T.E.M.J. designed Fig. 1. All authors contributed to,
and commented on, the manuscript before submission
and contributed to the development of the current
nomenclature guidelines.

1

Competing interests

The authors declare no competing interests.

Additional information

Supplementary information is available for this paper at
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41588-020-0669-3.

Nature Genetics | VOL 52 | August 2020 | 754–758 | www.nature.com/naturegenetics

