SOURCE: NIST Guide to the SI (NIST Special Publication 811), Footnotes
URL: https://www.nist.gov/pml/special-publication-811/nist-guide-si-footnotes
RETRIEVED: 2026-09-22
PAGE DATES: Created January 29, 2016, Updated August 18, 2025
WHAT IT IS: The United States national metrology institute's guide to SI usage. Carries
the exact definitions of the calorie, which is the unit Indian food labels are required
to use and which is not an SI unit.

The Fifth International Conference on the Properties of Steam (London, July 1956) defined
the International Table calorie as 4.1868 J. Therefore, the exact conversion factor for
the International Table Btu is 1.055 055 852 62 kJ. Note that the notation for
International Table used in this listing is subscript "IT." Similarily, the notation for
thermochemical is subscript "th." Further, the thermochemical Btu, Btuth, is based on the
thermochemical calorie, calth, where calth = 4.184 J exactly.

The small calorie or gram calorie approximates the energy needed to increase the
temperature of 1 gram of water by 1 C. Subscripts "IT" and "th" refer to International
Table and thermochemical calories, respectively; see footnote 9.

The kilogram calorie or "large calorie" is an obsolete term used for the kilocalorie,
which is the calorie used to express the energy content of foods. However, in practice,
the prefix "kilo" is usually omitted.

According to Ref. [4: ISO 31-0], a system of units is coherent with respect to a system of
quantities and equations if the system of units is chosen in such a way that the equations
between numerical values have exactly the same form (including the numerical factors) as
the corresponding equations between the quantities. In such a coherent system, of which
the SI is an example, no numerical factor other than the number 1 ever occurs in the
expressions for the derived units in terms of the base units.

See Ref. [1] or [2] for a brief description of the various bodies established by the Meter
Convention: The International Bureau of Weights and Measures (BIPM, Bureau International
des Poids et Mesures), the International Committee for Weights and Measures (CIPM, Comite
International des Poids et Mesures), and the CGPM. The BIPM, which is located in Sevres, a
suburb of Paris, France, and which has the task of ensuring worldwide unification of
physical measurements, operates under the exclusive supervision of the CIPM, which itself
comes under the authority of the CGPM.

Defined (not measured) value.
