Lang T, Altman D. Statistical Analyses and Methods in the Published Literature: the SAMPL Guidelines. 
1 
Basic Statistical Reporting for  
Articles Published in Biomedical Journals: 
The “Statistical Analyses and Methods  
in the Published Literature” or 
The SAMPL Guidelines” 
 
 
Thomas A. Langa and Douglas G. Altmanb 
a Principal, Tom Lang Communications and Training International 
b Director, Centre for Statistics in Medicine, Oxford University 
 
 
 
Have they reflected that the sciences founded on observation can only be promoted by 
statistics? . . . If medicine had not neglected this instrument, this means 
of progress, it would possess a greater number of positive truths, and 
 stand less liable to the accusation of being a science of unfixed  
principles, vague and conjectural. 
 
Jean-Etienne Dominique Esquirol, an early French psychiatrist,  
quoted in The Lancet, 1838 [1] 
 
Introduction 
 
The first major study of the quality of statistical 
reporting in the biomedical literature was published 
in 1966 [2]. Since then, dozens of similar studies 
have been published, every one of which has found 
that large proportions of articles contain errors in the 
application, analysis, interpretation, or reporting of 
statistics or in the design or conduct of research. (See, 
for example, references 3 through 19.) Further, large 
proportions of these errors are serious enough to call 
the authors’ conclusions into question [5,18,19]. The 
problem is made worse by the fact that most of these 
studies are of the world’s leading peer-reviewed 
general medical and specialty journals. 
 
Although errors have been found in more complex 
statistical procedures [20,21,22], paradoxically, many  
 
Lang T, Altman D. Basic statistical reporting for 
articles published in clinical medical journals: the 
SAMPL Guidelines. In: Smart P, Maisonneuve H, 
Polderman A (eds). Science Editors' Handbook, 
European Association of Science Editors, 2013. This 
document may be reprinted without charge but must 
include the original citation. 
errors are in basic, not advanced, statistical methods 
[23]. Perhaps advanced methods are suggested by 
consulting statisticians, who then competently 
perform the analyses, but it is also true that authors 
are far more likely to use only elementary statistical 
methods, if they use any at all [23-26]. Still, articles 
with even major errors continue to pass editorial and 
peer review and to be published in leading journals.   
 
The truth is that the problem of poor statistical 
reporting is long-standing, widespread, potentially 
serious, concerns mostly basic statistics, and yet is 
largely unsuspected by most readers of the 
biomedical literature [27].  
 
More than 30 years ago, O’Fallon and colleagues 
recommended that “Standards governing the content 
and format of statistical aspects should be developed 
to guide authors in the preparation of manuscripts”  
[28]. Despite the fact that this call has since been 
echoed by several others (17,18,29-32), most journals 
have still not included in their Instructions for 
Authors more than a paragraph or two about 
reporting statistical methods [33]. However, given 
that many statistical errors concern basic statistics, a

Lang T, Altman D. Statistical Analyses and Methods in the Published Literature: the SAMPL Guidelines. 
2 
comprehensive—and comprehensible—set of 
reporting guidelines might improve how statistical 
analyses are documented.  
 
In light of the above, we present here a set of 
statistical reporting guidelines suitable for medical 
journals to include in their Instructions for Authors. 
These guidelines tell authors, journal editors, and 
reviewers how to report basic statistical methods and 
results. Although these guidelines are limited to the 
most common statistical analyses, they are 
nevertheless sufficient to prevent most of the 
reporting deficiencies routinely found in scientific 
articles; they may also help to prevent some reporting 
errors by focusing attention on key points in the 
analyses.   
 
Unlike many of other guidelines, the SAMPL 
guidelines were not developed by a formal 
consensus-building process, but they do draw 
considerably from published guidelines [27,34-37]. 
In addition, a comprehensive review of the literature 
on statistical reporting errors reveals near universal 
agreement on how to report the most common 
methods [27]. 
 
Statistical analyses are closely related to the design 
and activities of the research itself. However, our 
guidelines do not address the issues related to the 
design and conduct of research. Instead, we refer 
readers to the EQUATOR Network website 
(www.equator-network.org) where guidelines for 
reporting specific research designs can be found. (For 
example, see the CONSORT [38], TREND [39], 
STROBE [40]) These guidelines for reporting 
methodologies all include items on reporting 
statistics, but the guidelines presented here are more 
specific and complement, not duplicate, those in the 
methodology guidelines. 
 
We welcome feedback and anticipate the need to 
update this guidance in due course.

Lang T, Altman D. Statistical Analyses and Methods in the Published Literature: the SAMPL Guidelines. 
3 
Reporting Basic Statistical Analyses and Methods  
in the Published Literature: 
The SAMPL Guidelines for Biomedical Journals 
 
Guiding Principles for Reporting Statistical Methods and Results 
 
Our first guiding principle for statistical reporting 
comes from The International Committee of Medical 
Journal Editors, whose Uniform Requirements for 
Manuscripts Submitted to Biomedical Journals 
include the following excellent statement about 
reporting statistical analyses: 
  
“Describe statistical methods with enough detail 
to enable a knowledgeable reader with access to 
the original data to verify the reported results. 
[Emphasis added.] When possible, quantify 
findings and present them with appropriate 
indicators of measurement error or uncertainty 
(such as confidence intervals). Avoid relying solely 
on statistical hypothesis testing, such as P values, 
which fail to convey important information about 
effect size. References for the design of the study 
and statistical methods should be to standard works 
when possible (with pages stated). Define 
statistical terms, abbreviations, and most symbols. 
Specify the computer software used” [33,41]. 
 
Our second guiding principle for statistical reporting 
is to provide enough detail that the results can be 
incorporated into other analyses. In general, this 
principle requires reporting the descriptive statistics 
from which other statistics are derived, such as the 
numerators and denominators of percentages, 
especially in risk, odds, and hazards ratios. Likewise, 
P values are not sufficient for re-analysis. Needed 
instead are descriptive statistics for the variables 
being compared, including sample size of the groups 
involved, the estimate (or “effect size”) associated 
with the P value, and a measure of precision for the 
estimate, usually a 95% confidence interval. 
 
General Principles for Reporting Statistical Methods 
 
Preliminary analyses 
• Identify any statistical procedures used to modify 
raw data before analysis. Examples include 
mathematically transforming continuous 
measurements to make distributions closer to the 
normal distribution, creating ratios or other derived 
variables, and collapsing continuous data into 
categorical data or combining categories. 
 
 
Primary analyses
• Describe the purpose of the analysis. 
 
• Identify the variables used in the analysis and 
summarize each with descriptive statistics. 
 
• When possible, identify the smallest difference 
considered to be clinically important. 
 
•  Describe fully the main methods for analyzing the 
primary objectives of the study.  
 
•  Make clear which method was used for each 
analysis, rather than just listing in one place all the 
statistical methods used.  
• Verify that that data conformed to the assumptions 
of the test used to analyze them. In particular, 
specify that 1) skewed data were analyzed with 
non-parametric tests, 2) paired data were analyzed 
with paired tests, and 3) the underlying relationship 
analyzed with linear regression models was linear.  
 
•  Indicate whether and how any allowance or 
adjustments were made for multiple comparisons

Lang T, Altman D. Statistical Analyses and Methods in the Published Literature: the SAMPL Guidelines. 
4 
(performing multiple hypothesis tests on the same 
data).  
 
• If relevant, report how any outlying data were 
treated in the analysis. 
• Say whether tests were one- or two-tailed and 
justify the use of one-tailed tests. 
 
• Report the alpha level (e.g., 0.05) that defines 
statistical significance.  
• Name the statistical package or program used in the 
analysis.  
 
Supplementary analyses 
• Describe methods used for any ancillary analyses, 
such as sensitivity analyses, imputation of missing  
values, or testing of assumptions underlying 
methods of analysis.  
• Identify post-hoc analyses, including unplanned 
subgroup analyses, as exploratory. 
General Principles for Reporting Statistical Results 
Reporting numbers and descriptive statistics
• Report numbers—especially measurements—with 
an appropriate degree of precision. For ease of 
comprehension and simplicity, round to a 
reasonable extent. For example, mean age can 
often be rounded to the nearest year without 
compromising either the clinical or the statistical 
analysis. If the smallest meaningful difference on a 
scale is 5 points, scores can be reported as whole 
numbers; decimals are not necessary. 
 
• Report total sample and group sizes for each 
analysis. 
 
• Report numerators and denominators for all 
percentages. 
 
• Summarize data that are approximately normally 
distributed with means and standard deviations 
(SD). Use the form: mean (SD), not mean ± SD.  
• Summarize data that are not normally distributed 
with medians and interpercentile ranges, ranges, or 
both. Report the upper and lower boundaries of 
interpercentile ranges and the minimum and 
maximum values of ranges, not just the size of the 
range. 
 
• Do NOT use the standard error of the mean (SE) to 
indicate the variability of a data set. Use standard 
deviations, inter-percentile ranges, or ranges 
instead. (The SE is an inferential statistic—it is 
about a 68% confidence interval—not a descriptive 
statistic.) 
 
• Display data in tables or figures. Tables present 
exact values, and figures provide an overall 
assessment of the data.[42,43] 
 
Reporting risk, rates, and ratios 
• Identify the type of rate (e.g., incidence rates; 
survival rates), ratio (e.g., odds ratios; hazards 
ratios), or risk (e.g., absolute risks; relative risk 
differences), being reported. 
 
• Identify the quantities represented in the numerator 
and denominator (e.g., the number of men with 
prostate cancer divided by the number of men in 
whom prostate cancer can occur).  
• Identify the time period over with each rate applies. 
 
• Identify any unit of population (that is, the unit 
multiplier: e.g., x 100; x 10,000) associated with 
the rate. 
 
• Consider reporting a measure of precision (a 
confidence interval) for estimated risks, rates, and 
ratios.

Lang T, Altman D. Statistical Analyses and Methods in the Published Literature: the SAMPL Guidelines. 
5 
Reporting hypothesis tests 
 
• State the hypothesis being tested.  
 
• Identify the variables in the analysis and summarize 
the data for each variable with the appropriate 
descriptive statistics. 
 
• If possible, identify the minimum difference 
considered to be clinically important. 
 
• For equivalence and non-inferiority studies, report 
the largest difference between groups that will still 
be accepted as indicating biological equivalence 
(the equivalence margin). 
 
• Identify the name of the test used in the analysis. 
Report whether the test was one- or two-tailed 
(justify the use of one-tailed tests) and for paired or 
independent samples. 
 
• Confirm that the assumptions of the test were met 
by the data.   
 
• Report the alpha level (e.g., 0.05) that defines 
statistical significance. 
 
• At least for primary outcomes, such as differences 
or agreement between groups, diagnostic 
sensitivity, and slopes of regression lines, report a 
measure of precision, such as the 95% confidence 
interval. 
 
• Do NOT use the standard error of the mean (SE) to 
indicate the precision of an estimate. The SE is 
essentially a 68% confidence coefficient: use the 
95% confidence coefficient instead. 
 
• Although not preferred to confidence intervals, if 
desired, P values should be reported as equalities 
when possible and to one or two decimal places 
(e.g., P = 0.03 or 0.22 not as inequalities: e.g., P < 
0.05). Do NOT report “NS”; give the actual P 
value. The smallest P value that need be reported is 
P <0.001, save in studies of genetic associations.  
 
• Report whether and how any adjustments were 
made for multiple statistical comparisons. 
 
• Name the statistical software package used in the 
analysis. 
 
 
Reporting association analyses 
• Describe the association of interest. 
 
• Identify the variables used and summarize each 
with descriptive statistics.  
 
• Identify the test of association used.  
 
• Indicate whether the test was one- or two-tailed. 
Justify the use of one-tailed tests.  
 
• For tests of association (e.g., a chi-square test), 
report the P value of the test (because association 
is defined as a statistically significant result). 
 
• For measures of association (i.e., the phi 
coefficient), report the value of the coefficient and 
a confidence interval. Do not describe the 
association as low, moderate, or high unless the 
ranges for these categories have been defined. 
Even then, consider the wisdom of using these 
categories given their biological implications or 
realities. 
 
• For primary comparisons, consider including the 
full contingency table for the analysis. 
 
• Name the statistical package or program used in the 
analysis.  
 
Reporting correlation analyses
• Describe the purpose of the analysis. 
 
• Summarize each variable with the appropriate 
descriptive statistics. 
 
• Identify the correlation coefficient used in the 
analysis (e.g., Pearson, Spearman). 
 
• Confirm that the assumptions of the analysis were 
met.

Lang T, Altman D. Statistical Analyses and Methods in the Published Literature: the SAMPL Guidelines. 
6 
• Report the alpha level (e.g., 0.05) that indicates 
whether the correlation coefficient is statistically 
significant. 
 
• Report the value of the correlation coefficient. Do 
not describe correlation as low, moderate, or high 
unless the ranges for these categories have been 
defined. Even then, consider the wisdom of using 
these categories given their biological implications 
or realities. 
 
• For primary comparisons, report the (95%) 
confidence interval for the correlation coefficient, 
whether or not it is statistically significant.  
• For primary comparisons, consider reporting the 
results as a scatter plot. The sample size, correlation 
coefficient (with its confidence interval), and P 
value can be included in the data field. 
 
• Name the statistical package or program used in the 
analysis.  
 
Reporting regression analyses 
• Describe the purpose of the analysis.  
 
• Identify the variables used in the analysis and 
summarize each with descriptive statistics.  
 
• Confirm that the assumptions of the analysis were 
met. For example, in linear regression indicate 
whether an analysis of residuals confirmed the 
assumptions of linearity.  
 
• If relevant, report how any outlying values were 
treated in the analysis.  
 
• Report how any missing data were treated in the 
analyses. 
 
• For either simple or multiple (multivariable) 
regression analyses, report the regression equation. 
 
• For multiple regression analyses: 1) report the alpha 
level used in the univariate analysis; 2) report 
whether the variables were assessed for a) 
colinearity and b) interaction; and 3) describe the 
variable selection process by which the final model 
was developed (e.g., forward-stepwise; best 
subset). 
 
• Report the regression coefficients (beta weights) of 
each explanatory variable and the associated 
confidence intervals and P values, preferably in a 
table.  
 
• Provide a measure of the model's "goodness-of-fit" 
to the data (the coefficient of determination, r2, for 
simple regression and the coefficient of multiple 
determination, R2, for multiple regression).  
 
• Specify whether and how the model was validated.  
 
• For primary comparisons analyzed with simple 
linear regression analysis, consider reporting the 
results graphically, in a scatter plot showing the 
regression line and its confidence bounds. Do not 
extend the regression line (or the interpretation of 
the analysis) beyond the minimum and maximum 
values of the data.  
 
• Name the statistical package or program used in the 
analysis.  
 
Reporting analyses of variance (ANOVA) or of covariance (ANCOVA) 
 
• Describe the purpose of the analysis. 
 
• Identify the variables used in the analysis and 
summarize each with descriptive statistics. 
 
• Confirm that the assumptions of the analysis were 
met. For example, indicate whether an analysis of 
residuals confirmed the assumptions of linearity.   
 
• If relevant, report how any outlying data were 
treated in the analysis. 
• Report how any missing data were treated in the 
analyses. 
 
• Specify whether the explanatory variables were 
tested for interaction, and if so how these 
interactions were treated. 
 
• If appropriate, in a table, report the P value for each 
explanatory variable, the test statistics and, where 
applicable, the degrees of freedom for the analysis.

Lang T, Altman D. Statistical Analyses and Methods in the Published Literature: the SAMPL Guidelines. 
7 
• Provide an assessment of the goodness-of-fit of the 
model to the data, such as R2. 
 
• Specify whether and how the model was validated. 
• Name the statistical package or program used in the 
analysis.  
 
 
Reporting survival (time-to-event) analyses 
• Describe the purpose of the analysis. 
 
• Identify the dates or events that mark the beginning 
and the end of the time period analyzed. 
 
• Specify the circumstances under which data were 
censored. 
 
• Specify the statistical methods used to estimate the 
survival rate. 
 
• Confirm that the assumptions of survival analysis 
were met. 
 
• For each group, give the estimated survival 
probability at appropriate follow-up times, with 
confidence intervals, and the number of 
participants at risk for death at each time. It is often 
more helpful to plot the cumulative probability of 
not surviving, especially when events are not 
common. 
 
• Reporting median survival times, with confidence 
intervals, is often useful to allow the results to be 
compared with those of other studies. 
 
• Consider presenting the full results in a graph (e.g., 
a Kaplan-Meier plot) or table. 
 
• Specify the statistical methods used to compare two 
or more survival curves. 
 
• When comparing two or more survival curves with 
hypothesis tests, report the P value of the 
comparison 
 
• Report the regression model used to assess the 
associations between the explanatory variables and 
survival or time-to-event.  
 
• Report a measure of risk (e.g., a hazard ratio) for 
each explanatory variable, with a confidence 
interval. 
Reporting Bayesian analyses 
 
• Specify the pre-trial probabilities (“priors”). 
 
• Explain how the priors were selected. 
 
• Describe the statistical model used. 
 
• Describe the techniques used in the analysis. 
 
• Identify the statistical software program used in the 
analysis. 
 
• Summarize the posterior distribution with a measure 
of central tendency and a credibility interval 
 
• Assess the sensitivity of the analysis to different 
priors. 
 
 
References 
 
1. Esquirol JED. Cited in: Pearl R. Introduction to 
Medical Biometry and Statistics. Philadelphia: WB 
Saunders, 1941. 
2. Schor S, Karten I. Statistical evaluation of medical 
journal manuscripts. JAMA. 1966;195:1123-8. 
3. Nagele P. Misuse of standard error of the mean (SEM) 
when reporting variability of a sample. A critical 
evaluation of four anaesthesia journals. Brit J Anaesth. 
2003; 90: 514-6. 
4. Neville JA, Lang W, Fleischer AB Jr. Errors in the 
Archives of Dermatology and the Journal of the 
American Academy of Dermatology from January 
through December 2003. Arch Dermatol. 2006; 142: 
737-40.   
5.  Glantz SA. Biostatistics: how to detect, correct and 
prevent errors in the medical literature. Circulation. 
1980;61:1-7. 
6. Lionel ND, Herxheimer A. Assessing reports of 
therapeutic trials. BMJ. 1970;3:637- 40.

Lang T, Altman D. Statistical Analyses and Methods in the Published Literature: the SAMPL Guidelines. 
8 
7. Altman DG. Statistics in medical journals: developments 
in the 1980s. Stat Med. 1991;10:1897-913. 
8. White S J. Statistical errors in papers in the British 
Journal of Psychiatry. Br J Psychiatr. 1979;135:336-42. 
9. Gore SM, Jones IG, Rytter EC. Misuse of statistical 
methods: critical assessment of articles in BMJ from 
January to March 1976. BMJ. 1977;1:85-7. 
10. Scales CD Jr, Norris RD, Peterson BL, et al. Clinical 
research and statistical methods in the urology 
literature. J Urol. 2005;174:1374-19.  
11. Kurichi JE, Sonnad SS. Statistical methods in the 
surgical literature. J Am Col Surg. 2006;202:476-84. 
12. Gardner MJ, Altman DG, Jones DR, Machin D. Is the 
statistical assessment of papers submitted to the British 
Medical Journal effective? BMJ. 1983;286:1485-8. 
13. Bakker M, Wicherts JM. The (mis)reporting of 
statistical results in psychology journals. Behav Res. 
2011;43:666-78.  
14. Avram MJ, Shanks CA, Dykes MH, et al. Statistical 
methods in anesthesia articles: an evaluation of two 
American journals during two six-month periods. 
Anesth Analg. 1985;64:607-11. 
15. Godfrey K. Comparing the means of several groups. N 
Engl J Med.1985;313:1450-6.  
16. A survey of three medical journals. N Engl J Med. 
1987;317:426-32. 
17. Pocock SJ, Hughes MD, Lee RJ. Statistical problems in 
the reporting of clinical trials. A survey of three 
medical journals. N Engl J Med. 1987 Aug 
13;317(7):426-32. 
18. Murray GD. Statistical aspects of research 
methodology. Br J Surg. 1991;78:777-81.  
19. Yancy JM. Ten rules for reading clinical research 
reports [Editorial]. Am J Surg. 1990;159:553-9. 
20. Burton A, Altman DG. Missing covariate data within 
cancer prognostic studies: a review of current reporting 
and proposed guidelines. Br J Cancer 2004;91:4-8. 
21. Mackinnon A. The use and reporting of multiple 
imputation in medical research – a review. J Intern Med 
2010;268:586-93. 
22. Schwarzer G, Vach W, Schumacher M. On the misuses 
of artificial neural networks for prognostic and 
diagnostic classification in oncology. Stat Med 
2000;19:541-61. 
23 George SL. Statistics in medical journals: a survey of 
current policies and proposals for editors. Med Pediatr 
Oncol. 1985;13:109-12. 
24. Emerson JD, Colditz GA. The statistical content of 
published medical research: some implications for 
biomedical education. Med Educ. 1985:19(3);248-255. 
DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2923.1985.tb01315.x 
25. Golden J, Zhu W, Sayre JW. A review of the statistical 
analysis used in papers published in Clinical Radiology 
and British Journal of Radiology. Clin Radiol. 
1996;51(1):47- 50. 
26. Lee CM, Soin HK, Einarson TR. Statistics in the 
Pharmacy Literature. Ann Pharmacother. 2004; 
38(9):1412-1418. DOI 10.1345/aph.1D493  
27. Lang T, Secic M. How to Report Statistics in Medicine: 
Annotated Guidelines for Authors, Editors, and 
Reviewers, Second edition. Philadelphia: American 
College of Physicians, 2006. 
28. O’Fallon JR, Duby SD, Salsburg DS, et al. Should there 
be statistical guidelines for medical research papers? 
Biometrics, 1978;34:687-95. 
29. Shott S. Statistics in veterinary research. J Am Vet Med 
Assoc. 1985;187:138-41. 
30. Hayden GF. Biostatistical trends in Pediatrics: 
implications for the future. Pediatrics. 1983;72:84-7. 
31. Altman DG, Bland JM. Improving doctors’ 
understanding of statistics. J R Statist Soc A. 
1991;154:223-67. 
32. Altman DG, Gore SM, Gardner MJ, Pocock SJ. 
Statistical guidelines for contributors to medical 
journals. BMJ. 1983; 286:1489-93. 
33. Bailar JC 3rd, Mosteller F.  Guidelines for statistical 
reporting in articles for medical journals.  
Amplifications and explanations.  Ann Intern Med. 
1988 108(2):266-73. 
34. Bond GR, Mintz J, McHugo GJ. Statistical guidelines 
for the Archives of PM&R. Arch Phys Med Rehabil 
1995;76:784-7. 
35. Wilkinson L and the Task Force on Statistical 
Inference. Statistical methods in psychology journals. 
Guidelines and explanations. Am Psychologist 
1999;54:594-604. 
36. Curran-Everett D, Benos DJ; American Physiological 
Society. Guidelines for reporting statistics in journals 
published by the American Physiological Society. Am J 
Physiol Endocrinol Metab 2004;287:E189-91. (plus 
other journals) 
37. Curran-Everett D, Benos DJ. Guidelines for reporting 
statistics in journals published by the American 
Physiological Society: the sequel. Adv Physiol Educ 
2007;31:295-8. 
38. Moher D, Schulz K, Altman DG, for the CONSORT 
Group. CONSORT statement: revised 
recommendations for improving the quality of reports 
of parallel-group randomized trials. Ann Intern Med. 
2001;134:657-62. 
39. Des Jarlais DC, Lyles C, Crepaz N, Trend Group. 
Improving the reporting quality of nonrandomized 
evaluations of behavioral and public health 
interventions: the TREND statement. Am J Public 
Health. 2004; 94(3):361-6. PMID: 14998794 
40. von Elm E, Altman DG, Egger M, Pocock SJ, Gotzsche 
PC, Vandenbroucke JP. The Strengthening the 
Reporting of Observational Studies in Epidemiology 
(STROBE) Statement: guidelines for reporting 
observational studies.   Ann Intern Med. 2007; 
147(8):573-577.   PMID: 17938396 
41. International Committee of Medical Journal Editors. 
Uniform requirements for manuscripts submitted to 
biomedical journals: writing and editing for biomedical 
publication, 2011. www.icmje.org. Accessed December 
12, 2012. 
42. Schriger DL, Arora S, Altman DG. The content of 
medical journal instructions for authors. Ann Emerg 
Med 2006;48:743-749, 749.e1-4. 
43. Lang T. How to Write, Publish, and Present in the 
Health Sciences: A Guide for Clinicians and Laboratory 
Researchers. Philadelphia: American College of 
Physicians, 2010.

Lang T, Altman D. Statistical Analyses and Methods in the Published Literature: the SAMPL Guidelines. 
9