Figure 4.1: Example qualitative color scales. The Okabe Ito scale is the default scale used throughout this book (Okabe and Ito 2008). The ColorBrewer Dark2 scale is provided by the ColorBrewer project (Brewer 2017). The ggplot2 hue scale is the default qualitative scale in the widely used plotting software ggplot2.

Figure 4.2: Population growth in the U.S. from 2000 to 2010. States in the West and South have seen the largest increases, whereas states in the Midwest and Northeast have seen much smaller increases or even, in the case of Michigan, a decrease. Data source: U.S. Census Bureau

Figure 4.3: Example sequential color scales. The ColorBrewer Blues scale is a monochromatic scale that varies from dark to light blue. The Heat and Viridis scales are multi-hue scales that vary from dark red to light yellow and from dark blue via green to light yellow, respectively.

Figure 4.4: Median annual income in Texas counties. The highest median incomes are seen in major Texas metropolitan areas, in particular near Houston and Dallas. No median income estimate is available for Loving County in West Texas and therefore that county is shown in gray. Data source: 2015 Five-Year American Community Survey

Figure 4.5: Example diverging color scales. Diverging scales can be thought of as two sequential scales stiched together at a common midpoint color. Common color choices for diverging scales include brown to greenish blue, pink to yellow-green, and blue to red.

Figure 4.6: Percentage of people identifying as white in Texas counties. Whites are in the majority in North and East Texas but not in South or West Texas. Data source: 2010 Decennial U.S. Census

Figure 4.7: Example accent color scales, each with four base colors and three accent colors. Accent color scales can be derived in several different ways: (top) we can take an existing color scale (e.g., the Okabe Ito scale, Fig 4.1) and lighten and/or partially desaturate some colors while darkening others; (middle) we can take gray values and pair them with colors; (bottom) we can use an existing accent color scale, e.g. the one from the ColorBrewer project.

Figure 4.8: From 2000 to 2010, the two neighboring southern states Texas and Louisiana have experienced among the highest and lowest population growth across the U.S. Data source: U.S. Census Bureau

Figure 4.9: Track athletes are among the shortest and leanest of male professional athletes participating in popular sports. Data source: Telford and Cunningham (1991)