Figure 20.1: Sepal width versus sepal length for three different iris species (*Iris setosa*, *Iris virginica*, and *Iris versicolor*). Each point represents the measurements for one plant sample. A small amount of jitter has been applied to all point positions to prevent overplotting. The figure is labeled “bad” because the *virginica* points in green and the *versicolor* points in blue are difficult to distinguish from each other.

Figure 20.2: Color-vision-deficiency simulation of Figure 20.1.

Figure 20.3: Sepal width versus sepal length for three different iris species. Compared to Figure 20.1, we have swapped the colors for *Iris setosa* and *Iris versicolor* and we have given each iris species its own point shape.

Figure 20.4: Color-vision-deficiency simulation of Figure 20.3. Because of the use of different point shapes, even the fully desaturated gray-scale version of the figure is legible.

Figure 20.5: Stock price over time for four major tech companies. The stock price for each company has been normalized to equal 100 in June 2012. This figure is labeled as “bad” because it takes considerable mental energy to match the company names in the legend to the data curves. Data source: Yahoo Finance

Figure 20.6: Stock price over time for four major tech companies. The stock price for each company has been normalized to equal 100 in June 2012. Data source: Yahoo Finance

Figure 20.7: Color-vision-deficiency simulation of Figure 20.6.

Figure 20.8: Stock price over time for four major tech companies. The stock price for each company has been normalized to equal 100 in June 2012. Data source: Yahoo Finance

Figure 20.9: Sepal width versus sepal length for three different iris species. I have removed the background grid from this figure because otherwise the figure was becoming too busy.

Figure 20.10: Density estimates of the sepal lengths of three different iris species. Each density estimate is directly labeled with the respective species name.

Figure 20.11: Sepal width versus sepal length for three different iris species, with marginal density estimates of each variable for each species.

Figure 20.12: Temperatures in Lincoln, Nebraska, in 2016. This figure is a variation of Figure 9.9. Temperature is now shown both by location along the *x* axis and by color, and a color bar along the *x* axis visualizes the scale that converts temperatures into colors.