Figure 9.1: Mean daily temperatures in Lincoln, Nebraska in 2016. Points represent the average daily mean temperatures for each month, averaged over all days of the month, and error bars represent twice the standard deviation of the daily mean temperatures within each month. This figure has been labeled as “bad” because because error bars are conventionally used to visualize the uncertainty of an estimate, not the variability in a population. Data source: Weather Underground

Figure 9.2: Anatomy of a boxplot. Shown are a cloud of points (left) and the corresponding boxplot (right). Only the *y* values of the points are visualized in the boxplot. The line in the middle of the boxplot represents the median, and the box encloses the middle 50% of the data. The top and bottom whiskers extend either to the maximum and minimum of the data or to the maximum or minimum that falls within 1.5 times the height of the box, whichever yields the shorter whisker. The distances of 1.5 times the height of the box in either direction are called the upper and the lower fences. Individual data points that fall beyond the fences are referred to as outliers and are usually showns as individual dots.

Figure 9.3: Mean daily temperatures in Lincoln, Nebraska, visualized as boxplots.

Figure 9.4: Anatomy of a violin plot. Shown are a cloud of points (left) and the corresponding violin plot (right). Only the *y* values of the points are visualized in the violin plot. The width of the violin at a given *y* value represents the point density at that *y* value. Technically, a violin plot is a density estimate rotated by 90 degrees and then mirrored. Violins are therefore symmetric. Violins begin and end at the minimum and maximum data values, respectively. The thickest part of the violin corresponds to the highest point density in the dataset.

Figure 9.5: Mean daily temperatures in Lincoln, Nebraska, visualized as violin plots.

Figure 9.6: Mean daily temperatures in Lincoln, Nebraska, visualized as strip chart. Each point represents the mean temperature for one day. This figure is labeled as “bad” because so many points are plotted on top of each other that it is not possible to ascertain which temperatures were the most common in each month.

Figure 9.7: Mean daily temperatures in Lincoln, Nebraska, visualized as strip chart. The points have been jittered along the *x* axis to better show the density of points at each temperature value.

Figure 9.8: Mean daily temperatures in Lincoln, Nebraska, visualized as a sina plot (combination of individual points and violins). The points have been jittered along the *x* axis in proportion to the point density at the respective temperature. The name *sina plot* is meant to honor Sina Hadi Sohi, a student at the University of Copenhagen, Denmark, who wrote the first version of the code that researchers at the university used to make such plots (Frederik O. Bagger, personal communication).

Figure 9.9: Temperatures in Lincoln, Nebraska, in 2016, visualized as a ridgeline plot. For each month, we show the distribution of daily mean temperatures measured in Fahrenheit. Original figure concept: Wehrwein (2017).

Figure 9.10: Temperatures in Lincoln, Nebraska, in 2016, visualized as a ridgeline plot of histograms. The individual histograms don’t separate well visually, and the overall figure is quite busy and confusing.

Figure 9.11: Evolution of movie lengths over time. Since the 1960s, the majority of all movies are approximately 90 minutes long. Data source: Internet Movie Database, IMDB

Figure 9.12: Voting patterns in the U.S. House of Representatives have become increasingly polarized. DW-NOMINATE scores are frequently used to compare voting patterns of representatives between parties and over time. Here, score distributions are shown for each Congress from 1963 to 2013 separately for Democrats and Republicans. Each Congress is represented by its first year. Original figure concept: McDonald (2017).