Figure 19.1: Population growth from 2000 to 2010 versus population size in 2000, for all 50 U.S. states and the Discrict of Columbia. Every state is marked in a different color. Because there are so many states, it is very difficult to match the colors in the legend to the dots in the scatter plot. Data source: U.S. Census Bureau

Figure 19.2: Population growth from 2000 to 2010 versus population size in 2000. In contrast to Figure 19.1, I have now colored states by region and have directly labeled a subset of states. The majority of states have been left unlabeled to keep the figure from overcrowding. Data source: U.S. Census Bureau

Figure 19.3: Population growth in the U.S. from 2000 to 2010. The rainbow coloring of states serves no purpose and is distracting. Furthermore, the colors are overly saturated. Data source: U.S. Census Bureau

Figure 19.4: The rainbow colorscale is highly non-monotonic. This becomes clearly visible by converting the colors to gray values. From left to right, the scale goes from moderately dark to light to very dark and back to moderately dark. In addition, the changes in lightness are very non-uniform. The lightest part of the scale (corresponding to the colors yellow, light green, and cyan) takes up almost a third of the entire scale while the darkest part (corresponding to dark blue) is concentrated in a narrow region of the scale.

Figure 19.5: Percentage of people identifying as white in Texas counties. The rainbow color scale is not an appropriate scale to visualize continuous data values, because it tends to place emphasis on arbitrary features of the data. Here, it emphasizes counties in which approximately 75% of the population identify as white. Data source: 2010 Decennial U.S. Census

Figure 19.6: Color-vision deficiency (cvd) simulation of the sequential color scale Heat, which runs from dark red to light yellow. From left to right and top to bottom, we see the original scale and the scale as seen under deuteranomaly, protanomaly, and tritanomaly simulations. Even though the specific colors look different under the three types of cvd, in each case we can see a clear gradient from dark to light. Therefore, this color scale is safe to use for cvd.

Figure 19.7: A red–green contrast becomes indistinguishable under red–green cvd (deuteranomaly or protanomaly).

Figure 19.8: A blue–green contrast becomes indistinguishable under blue–yellow cvd (tritanomaly).

Figure 19.9: The ColorBrewer PiYG (pink to yellow-green) scale from Figure 4.5 looks like a red–green contrast to people with regular color vision but works for all forms of color-vision deficiency. It works because the reddish color is actually pink (a mix of red and blue) while the greenish color also contains yellow. The difference in the blue component between the two colors can be picked up even by deutans or protans, and the difference in the red component can be picked up by tritans.

Figure 19.10: Qualitative color palette for all color-vision deficiencies (Okabe and Ito 2008). The alphanumeric codes represent the colors in RGB space, encoded as hexadecimals. In many plot libraries and image-manipulation programs, you can just enter these codes directly. If your software does not take hexadecimals directly, you can also use the values in Table 19.1.

Figure 19.11: Colored elements become difficult to distinguish at small sizes. The top left panel (labeled “original”) shows four rectangles, four thick lines, four thin lines, and four groups of points, all colored in the same four colors. We can see that the colors become more difficult to distinguish the smaller or thinner the visual elements are. This problem becomes exacerbated in the cvd simulations, where the colors are already more difficult to distinguish even for the large graphical elements.