Figure 3.1: Standard cartesian coordinate system. The horizontal axis is conventionally called *x* and the vertical axis *y*. The two axes form a grid with equidistant spacing. Here, both the *x* and the *y* grid lines are separated by units of one. The point (2, 1) is located two *x* units to the right and one *y* unit above the origin (0, 0). The point (-1, -1) is located one *x* unit to the left and one *y* unit below the origin.

Figure 3.2: Daily temperature normals for Houston, TX. Temperature is mapped to the *y* axis and day of the year to the *x* axis. Parts (a), (b), and (c) show the same figure in different aspect ratios. All three parts are valid visualizations of the temperature data. Data source: NOAA.

Figure 3.3: Daily temperature normals for Houston, TX, plotted versus the respective temperature normals of San Diego, CA. The first days of the months January, April, July, and October are highlighted to provide a temporal reference. (a) Temperatures are shown in degrees Fahrenheit. (b) Temperatures are shown in degrees Celsius. Data source: NOAA.

Figure 3.4: Relationship between linear and logarithmic scales. The dots correspond to data values 1, 3.16, 10, 31.6, 100, which are evenly-spaced numbers on a logarithmic scale. We can display these data points on a linear scale, we can log-transform them and then show on a linear scale, or we can show them on a logarithmic scale. Importantly, the correct axis title for a logarithmic scale is the name of the variable shown, not the logarithm of that variable.

Figure 3.5: Population numbers of Texas counties relative to their median value. Select counties are highlighted by name. The dashed line indicates a ratio of 1, corresponding to a county with median population number. The most populous counties have approximately 100 times more inhabitants than the median county, and the least populous counties have approximately 100 times fewer inhabitants than the median county. Data source: 2010 Decennial U.S. Census.

Figure 3.6: Population sizes of Texas counties relative to their median value. By displaying a ratio on a linear scale, we have overemphasized ratios > 1 and have obscured ratios < 1. As a general rule, ratios should not be displayed on a linear scale. Data source: 2010 Decennial U.S. Census.

Figure 3.7: Relationship between linear and square-root scales. The dots correspond to data values 0, 1, 4, 9, 16, 25, 36, 49, which are evenly-spaced numbers on a square-root scale, since they are the squares of the integers from 0 to 7. We can display these data points on a linear scale, we can square-root-transform them and then show on a linear scale, or we can show them on a square-root scale.

Figure 3.8: Areas of Northeastern U.S. states. (a) Areas shown on a linear scale. (b) Areas shown on a square-root scale. Data source: Google.

Figure 3.9: Relationship between Cartesian and polar coordinates. (a) Three data points shown in a Cartesian coordinate system. (b) The same three data points shown in a polar coordinate system. We have taken the *x* coordinates from part (a) and used them as angular coordinates and the *y* coordinates from part (a) and used them as radial coordinates. The circular axis runs from 0 to 4 in this example, and therefore *x* = 0 and *x* = 4 are the same locations in this coordinate system.

Figure 3.10: Daily temperature normals for four selected locations in the U.S., shown in polar coordinates. The radial distance from the center point indicates the daily temperature in Fahrenheit, and the days of the year are arranged counter-clockwise starting with Jan. 1st at the 6:00 position.

Figure 3.11: Map of the world, shown in four different projections. The Cartesian longitude and latitude system maps the longitude and latitude of each location onto a regular Cartesian coordinate system. This mapping causes substantial distortions in both areas and angles relative to their true values on the 3D globe. The interrupted Goode homolosine projection perfectly represents true surface areas, at the cost of dividing some land masses into separate pieces, most notably Greenland and Antarctica. The Robinson projection and the Winkel tripel projection both strike a balance between angular and area distortions, and they are commonly used for maps of the entire globe.