Figure 7.1: Histogram of the ages of Titanic passengers.

Figure 7.2: Histograms depend on the chosen bin width. Here, the same age distribution of Titanic passengers is shown with four different bin widths: (a) one year; (b) three years; (c) five years; (d) fifteen years.

Figure 7.3: Kernel density estimate of the age distribution of passengers on the Titanic. The height of the curve is scaled such that the area under the curve equals one. The density estimate was performed with a Gaussian kernel and a bandwidth of 2.

Figure 7.4: Kernel density estimates depend on the chosen kernel and bandwidth. Here, the same age distribution of Titanic passengers is shown for four different combinations of these parameters: (a) Gaussian kernel, bandwidth = 0.5; (b) Gaussian kernel, bandwidth = 2; (c) Gaussian kernel, bandwidth = 5; (d) Rectangular kernel, bandwidth = 2.

Figure 7.5: Kernel density estimates can extend the tails of the distribution into areas where no data exist and no data are even possible. Here, the density estimate has been allowed to extend into the negative age range. This is clearly nonsensical and should be avoided.

Figure 7.6: Histogram of the ages of Titanic passengers stratified by gender. This figure has been labeled as “bad” because stacked histograms are easily confused with overlapping histograms (see also Figure 7.7). In addition, the heights of the bars representing female passengers cannot easily be compared to each other.

Figure 7.7: Age distributions of male and female Titanic passengers, shown as two overlapping histograms. This figure has been labeled as “bad” because there is no clear visual indication that all blue bars start at a count of 0.

Figure 7.8: Density estimates of the ages of male and female Titanic passengers. To highlight that there were more male than female passengers, the density curves were scaled such that the area under each curve corresponds to the total number of male and female passengers with known age (468 and 288, respectively).

Figure 7.9: Age distributions of male and female Titanic passengers, shown as proportion of the passenger total. The colored areas show the density estimates of the ages of male and female passengers, respectively, and the gray areas show the overall passenger age distribution.

Figure 7.10: The age distributions of male and female Titanic passengers visualized as an age pyramid.

Figure 7.11: Density estimates of the butterfat percentage in the milk of four cattle breeds. Data Source: Canadian Record of Performance for Purebred Dairy Cattle