Useful Junk? The Effects of Visual Embellishment  
on Comprehension and Memorability of Charts 
Scott Bateman, Regan L. Mandryk, Carl Gutwin, 
Aaron Genest, David McDine, Christopher Brooks 
Department of Computer Science, University of Saskatchewan, Saskatoon, Saskatchewan, Canada 
scott.bateman@usask.ca, regan@cs.usask.ca, gutwin@cs.usask.ca, 
aaron.genest@usask.ca, dam085@mail.usask.ca, cab938@mail.usask.ca 
 
ABSTRACT 
Guidelines for designing information charts often state that 
the presentation should reduce ‘chart junk’ – visual 
embellishments that are not essential to understanding the 
data. In contrast, some popular chart designers wrap the 
presented data in detailed and elaborate imagery, raising the 
questions of whether this imagery is really as detrimental to 
understanding as has been proposed, and whether the visual 
embellishment may have other benefits. To investigate 
these issues, we conducted an  experiment that compared 
embellished charts with plain ones, and measured both 
interpretation accuracy and long-term recall. We found that 
people’s accuracy in describing the embellished charts was 
no worse than for plain charts, and that their recall after a 
two-to-three-week gap was significantly better. Although 
we are cautious about recommending that all charts be 
produced in this style, our results question some of the 
premises of the minimalist approach to chart design. 
Author Keywords 
Charts, information visualization, imagery, memorability. 
ACM Classification Keywords 
H5.m. Information interfaces and presentation (e.g., HCI): 
Miscellaneous. 
General Terms 
Design, Human Factors 
INTRODUCTION 
Many experts in the area of ch art design, such as Edward 
Tufte, criticize the inclusion of visual embellishment in 
charts and graphs; their guid elines for good chart design 
often suggest that the addition of chart junk,  decorations 
and other kinds of non-essential imagery, to a chart can 
make interpretation more difficult and can distract readers 
from the data [22]. This minimalist perspective advocates 
plain and simple charts that maximize the proportion of 
data-ink – or the ink in the chart used to represent data.  
Despite these minimalist guidelines, many designers 
include a wide variety of visual embellishments in their 
charts, from small decorations to large images and visual 
backgrounds. One well-known proponent of visual 
embellishment in charts is the graphic artist Nigel Holmes, 
whose work regularly incorporates strong visual imagery 
into the fabric of the chart [7] (e.g., Figure 1). 
 
  
 
Figure 1. A chart by Holmes [7] (above), and a ‘plain’ version. 
These kinds of charts appear regularly in many mass-media 
publications, and the widespread use of embellished designs 
raises questions about whether the minimalist position on 
chart design is really the be tter approach. Two issues in 
particular are raised: first, whether visual embellishments 
do in fact cause comprehension problems; and second, 
whether the embellishments may provide additional 
information that is valuable for the reader. For example, the 
added visual imagery in a Ho lmes-style chart could draw 
 
Permission to make digital or hard copi es of all or part of this work fo r
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy otherwise,
or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prio r
specific permission and/or a fee. 
CHI 2010, April 10–15, 2010, Atlanta, Georgia, USA. 
Copyright 2010 ACM  978-1-60558-929-9/10/04....$10.00. 
 
CHI 2010: Graphs
April 10–15, 2010, Atlanta, GA, USA
2573

the reader's eye, could help to convey a specific message, or 
could make the chart more memorable. 
There is very little evidence from prior research to answer 
these questions. Previous studies have suggested that minor 
decoration in charts may not hamper interpretation 
[1,11,20], and work in psychology has shown that the use 
of imagery can affect memorability [4,6,14,17], but there is 
very little work that looks at how chart imagery can affect 
the way people view information charts.  
To answer these questions, we carried out an investigation 
that tested the effects of visual embellishments on two 
aspects of interaction with charts: interpretation accuracy, 
and memorability. We conducted a study in which 
participants looked at several different minimalist and 
embellished charts (taken directly from Holmes’s work) 
and answered questions about each chart’s topic and details. 
Participants then answered the same questions again, after a 
gap of either a few minutes or of around 2 weeks.  
Our study showed two main results. First, we did not find 
any difference in people’s in terpretation accuracy between 
the embellished and minimalist charts, despite the fact that 
the embellished charts contained a much larger amount of 
non-data-ink. Second, participants were able to remember 
significantly more about the embellished charts after a gap 
longer than 12 days, suggesting that the addition of strong 
visual images does help people to remember both the topic 
and details of the chart.  
We followed up these performa nce results with an analysis 
of eye tracking data, which showed that people did spend 
time looking at the non-data ink in the embellished charts. 
These results support the idea that people do notice and 
process the visual imagery, which may be helping to encode 
the chart in their memory. Further, in their subjective 
ratings of which type of charts they preferred for reading 
and remembering participants overwhelmingly chose 
Holmes-style charts over plain charts. 
Our study showed that if memorability is important, visual 
imagery can help to fix a chart in a viewer’s memory. 
However, we do not advocate this strategy as a general 
principle, because the use of strong images in charts is 
contentious – for example, images convey messages that 
may intentionally or unintentionally bias the viewer’s 
interpretation of the data. More importantly, then, our work 
shows that there can be strong effects from the inclusion of 
visual embellishments – something that has not been 
reported before – and that this phenomenon should be better 
understood by researchers and chart designers.  
PREVIOUS WORK 
The Debate over Visual Embellishment 
In the field of information design there has been a long-
standing debate concerning the use of imagery and 
‘unnecessary’ visual embellishments. While some of these 
arguments are aesthetic in nature, considerable focus is also 
placed on what presentation st yle best conveys information 
to a viewer in graphic form. We divide this work into two 
sides: those that discourage the use of visual 
embellishments, and those that encourage their use. 
The most well-known proponent of eliminating visual 
embellishments is Edward Tufte. Tufte takes the stance that 
“…it's wrong to distort the data measures—the ink locating 
values of numbers—in order to make an editorial comment 
or fit a decorative scheme” (p.59, [22]). Tufte proposes the 
data-ink ratio, where he argues that all ink that is not used 
to present data should be removed [22]. The data-ink ratio 
can be calculated by dividing the ink used for displaying 
data (data-ink) by the total ink used in the graphic, with the 
goal of having the ratio as close to 1 as possible. Cleveland 
[3] similarly proposed a series of recommendations for 
graph design, based on his research into graphical 
perception, and emphasized a minimalist approach to 
presenting data graphically. These minimalist views aim to 
reduce interpretation effort and increase interpretation 
accuracy when a user examines an information chart. 
Although Tufte’s and Cleveland’s rules of thumb are well 
known, designers and publications continue to produce 
charts with a wide variety of  chart junk, decorations, low 
data-ink ratios, and 3D representations. In a survey of 
journal publications, magazines, and newspapers from 1985 
to 1994, Zacks et al.  [24] found that there had been little 
change in the prevalence of graph features that are 
identified by Tufte, Cleveland, and others as undesirable. 
This suggests that there may be other reasons for including 
non-data-ink in graphs. 
The other side of the debate, where embellishment of data 
graphics is encouraged, is exemplified by the work of Nigel 
Holmes. Holmes states that a data graphic “must engage the 
reader’s interest” ([7], p. 60), and he demonstrates how this 
can be achieved using graphic imagery. He also states that 
“the purpose for making a chart is to clarify or make visible 
the facts that otherwise would lie buried in a mass of 
written materials” ([7], p. 21). 
Interpretation Time and Errors 
The minimalist perspective argu es that the inclusion of 
visual embellishments and correspondingly lower data-ink 
ratios in graphs decreases the interpretability of data. There 
is some support for this assertion when interpretability is 
defined as accuracy and speed in answering questions based 
on graphs. Schonlau and Peters [18] did find a small but 
significant decrease in accur acy when a third dimension 
was added to pie charts. Siegrist [19] found that 3D bar and 
pie charts usually take more time to evaluate, although the 
accuracy of those evaluations wa s on par with 2D versions. 
Gillan and Richman [5] showed that high data-ink ratios 
were correlated positively with faster response times and 
greater accuracy, although  further investigation 
demonstrated that varying the particular location and 
function of the additional ink changed results. For example, 
background images made interpretation harder, but lines for 
CHI 2010: Graphs
April 10–15, 2010, Atlanta, GA, USA
2574

X and Y axes improved response time. Their findings 
support Tufte’s assertion that data-ink should be 
maximized, but only “within reason.” 
However, other research differs, finding no significant 
differences in interpretability between varying ratios of data 
to ink. Kulla-Mader [11] found no differences in 
interpretation errors between three ratios of data-ink; 
however, ratios varied only in the presence and colour of 
gridlines, and the existence of  chart borders. Blasio and 
Bisantz [1] found no significant difference in interpretation 
time between low data-ink ratios and medium ratios in real-
time monitoring tasks. They did find a significant 
difference between their high data-ink condition and the 
other conditions, but the high data-ink data was presented 
as a table, while other ratio conditions were charts. In 
addition, visual psychophysics research into graphing 
elements has found that gra ph elements with irrelevant 
extra dimensions are processed just as quickly, and in some 
cases more quickly, than simpler elements [20]. 
Aesthetics and Preferences 
Tufte has suggested that ev en well-known chart designs, 
such as the rectangular bars of bar charts, contain redundant 
data. One of his redesigns suggest removing the left vertical 
line of the bar, leaving only an L-shaped indicator of a data 
point; he asserts that the left vertical bar is redundant ink. 
However, some researchers have suggested that moderate 
increases in visual embellishment such as fully-drawn 
graph elements (e.g. rectangular bars for values rather than 
L-shaped representations) or small levels of chart junk 
provide a valuable aesthetic improvement to the graphic. 
Inbar et al. [9] found that users preferred non-minimalist 
graphs; although, they suggested that the participant’s 
unfamiliarity with the minimalist design may have been a 
confounding factor in the st udy. They conclude that the 
problem is complicated, a conclusion supported by research 
into 3D graphs: Levy et al. [12] found that users have a 
preference for using 3D graphs for showing information to 
others and enhancing memorability, but 2D graphs for 
immediate personal use. 
These findings make sense within the context of Tractinsky 
and Meyer [21], who found that graphs were more likely to 
be designed with chart junk when designers had persuasion 
or impressiveness as an objective, particularly when the 
data in the graph reflected poorly on the graph designer.  
Chart Memorability 
Ware identifies ‘memory extension’ as one of the ways in 
which visualizations extend human cognition [23]. Charts, 
especially when they are us ed within the context of 
persuasion or presentation, are designed to aid in the 
memorability of the presented data [10], and existing 
research has supported this fact.  
In both recognition and free- recall situations, research 
suggests that pictures lead to better performance than words 
alone for experimental learning tasks  [6,17]. The impact of 
pictorial stimuli on written retention has been shown with 
young children and college students (e.g., [4,14]). A recent 
study examined the effects of pictorial illustrations on 
younger and older adults’ recall of the content of short 
sentences, and found that wh en pictorial stimuli is 
combined with verbal stimuli,  content recall was improved 
for both groups [2].  
The emotional tone of pictures also appears to affect 
memory. Mather and Nesmith [13] found that participants 
were more likely to remember the location of positive and 
negative pictures than non-arousing pictures during an 
incidental-coding task. Since enhancement of memory 
occurred for both positive and negative pictures, it can be 
noted that arousal (rather than valence) is the critical factor. 
Blasio and Bisantz [1] argue that in monitoring tasks, such 
as situational awareness of a control board, interpretability 
is paramount. Reductions in interpretation in these settings 
can significantly increase costs for corporations or make 
typical tasks much more mentally demanding. The majority 
of charts are generated for static media, but in these 
situations memorability of a graph may be as, or more, 
important than the interpretability; as having the static chart 
media on-hand when it is needed may not be possible. 
There have been very few studies of memorability in 
graphs. Kelly [10] found no differences in memorability 
between high and low data-ink conditions. Kelly’s findings 
may have been confounded by the questions asked in the 
study, which included estimation-based components that 
could have biased the results. 
COMPARISON OF PLAIN AND EMBELLISHED CHARTS 
We designed an experiment to investigate differences in 
comprehension and recall between charts with two 
dramatically different levels of visual imagery. We 
maximized the differences in visual embellishment between 
two sets of charts while remaining as realistic as possible. 
For our embellished charts, we selected fourteen charts 
from Nigel Holmes’ book Designer’s Guide to Creating 
Charts and Diagrams [7] (see Figure 2). All of the charts 
incorporated some degree of chart junk, had relatively low 
data-ink ratios, and often contained images and cartoons 
that were woven into the presentation of the data. These 
charts were designed to attrac t the eye, engage the reader, 
and sometimes provide a particular value message over and 
above the presentation of the data itself.  
For each of the Holmes charts we created a plain version of 
the chart (Figure 2), taking care to include exactly the same 
data in the chart (including type  of chart, titles, axis labels, 
and axis values). In creating the plain charts we did not 
focus on specifically maximizing the data-ink ratio, but 
developed charts that reflected Inbar’s conjecture [9] about 
the ‘sweet spot’ of chart design where high data-ink ratios 
and familiarity intersect to create comfortably readable 
graphs. As a result, the plain charts preserved axis ticks, the 
overall chart style (e.g. bar, line, or pie), and the positioning 
of axis values and labels as they existed in the original 
CHI 2010: Graphs
April 10–15, 2010, Atlanta, GA, USA
2575

Holmes version. However, axis lines (both for X and Y) 
were removed, and the axis titles and chart title were 
repositioned if necessary to conform to more traditional title 
positions. Bar and line charts were framed by a black box, 
and all used grayscale.  
Participants and Apparatus 
Twenty participants (9 male, 11 female), aged between 18 
and 40 were recruited from a local university (7 graduate, 
13 undergraduate). Of the 20 participants, 17 said they at 
least occasionally creat ed charts and 19 said they at least 
occasionally read or interpreted charts. 
The charts were digitized and formatted to be displayable 
on a computer monitor as full- screen slides, yielding 14 
charts, each with a Holmes version and a plain version. A 
standard Windows PC was used to present the charts on a 
24-inch widescreen monitor; we used a Tobii eye tracker to 
capture eye-gaze data. 
Each slideshow presented the fourteen charts, alternating 
between Holmes and plain versions. Each participant saw 
only one version of each chart, either Holmes or plain. 
Presentation order for the versions was counterbalanced, 
but chart order was not. We treated the first two slides as 
training. A fixation-cross slide was displayed between each 
chart to provide the participants with a visual break.   
Procedure 
The experiment had two parts: a chart reading and 
description phase, and a recall phase. To prevent intentional 
learning, participants were not told about the recall phase – 
they were told that there were two parts to the study and 
that the first part was unrelated to the second part. 
Participants were assigned to one of two order conditions, 
with ten in each condition. 
Part 1: Reading and Description Task 
Participants were seated appr oximately 24 inches from the 
computer monitor, and the ey e-tracker was calibrated for 
each participant. The expe rimenter instructed the 
participants that they would be shown a series of charts that 
they could examine for as lo ng as they needed while 
answering four questions related to the chart. Participants 
were informed that they could answer the questions without 
prompting or ask for assistance in the form of a reminder. 
The answers were stated verba lly to the experimenter. If at 
any time, the participant strayed from either the prescribed 
question ordering or subject matter, the experimenter would 
redirect the conversation to focus on the question.  
The experimenter asked the four questions verbally; the list 
of questions is shown below, followed by extra instructions 
(in italics) provided if the participant did not understand. 
Questions represent components of high-level chart 
comprehension. 
Q1–Subject: ‘What is the chart is about?’ ‘Tell me about 
the basic subject of the chart.’ 
Q2–Values: ‘ What are the displayed categories and 
values?’ ‘Tell me how the chart is organized and any 
relevant values.’ 
Q3–Trend: ‘What is the basic trend of the graph?’ ‘Tell me 
whether the chart shows any changes and describe 
these changes.’  (Note that this question was not 
relevant for pie charts.) 
Q4–Value Message: ‘Is the author trying to communicate 
some message through the chart?’ ‘Is the author trying 
to get across a specific point or is he or she merely 
presenting objective information?’ 
If participants failed to provide a complete answer to any 
question, the experimenter went through a series of 
increasingly specific prompts until either the participant 
sufficiently answered the que stion or the list of prompts 
was exhausted. The prompts were as follows: 
1. ‘Can you be more specific?’ This prompt was provided 
as generic reminder to elaborate. 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
Figure 2. Example charts used in the study: Holmes versions 
(left) and equivalent plain versions (right). 
CHI 2010: Graphs
April 10–15, 2010, Atlanta, GA, USA
2576

2. ‘Can you be more specific about X?’, where X was a 
question-specific prompt. e.g. ‘the basic subject’; ‘how 
they’ve categorized the data ’; ‘any changes the chart 
shows’; or ‘whether there is a message’. 
3. A specific prompt directly related to the component of 
the participant’s answer currently missing. (E.g. ‘What 
were the values on the x-axis of the graph?’) 
Part 2: Recall Task 
After the reading and description task, participants were 
placed in one of two recall co nditions (immediate recall or 
long-term recall), with ten pa rticipants in each. The long-
term participants scheduled their second part of the study 
for two to three weeks later. Participants in both conditions 
had previously been informed that the second portion of the 
experiment was unrelated to the first and therefore 
remained unaware of the recall task. 
Participants in the immediate recall condition played a five-
minute game after describing the charts to clear their visual 
and linguistic memory before starting the recall task.  
At the beginning of the recall task, whether in the 
immediate or long-term recall condition, participants were 
reminded of the four component questions they had been 
asked for each chart during the description task (subject, 
values, trend, and message) then instructed to recall as 
many of the charts as possible. The experimenter recorded 
any correctly recalled charts (e.g. “I remember one about 
the price of diamonds”). After the participant had recalled 
as many charts as possible,  the experimenter asked the 
participants to describe the charts as completely as they 
could, based on the four component questions. The 
descriptive recall was performed in the order of chart recall, 
not experimental presentation. If at any point the participant 
recalled a new chart, it was added to the end of the recall 
list, but the participant was redirected to the current chart’s 
descriptive recall stage. Finally, the experimenter prompted 
the participant for each un-recalled chart (e.g. “Do you 
remember the chart called ‘Monstrous Costs’?”) and 
continued with a descriptive recall stage for each in turn.  
Measures 
We collected three types of data from the experiment: 
experimenter-coded response scores, eye-gaze data, and a 
preference questionnaire. 
Response Scores 
A single experimenter coded the participant responses. The 
same scale was used in both description and recall parts of 
the study. The experimenter updated a checklist as the 
participant described each graph. For each question in both 
the description and long-term recall the experimenter 
scored the participant’s answer in two parts: first, whether a 
prompt was required (scored as either “Yes” or “No”, 
regardless of what level of prompting was required; second, 
the quality of their response (independent of prompting) on 
the following four point scale. 
3 points (all correct) : The participant provided all of the 
relevant information in a given category. 
2 points (mostly correct):  The participant provided most 
of the relevant information in a given category, but 
omitted one or two important details. 
1 point (mostly incorrect):  The participant provided some 
correct information in a given category, but omitted 
most relevant details. 
0 points (all incorrect) : The participant provided no 
correct or relevant information in a given category. 
0 points (I don’t know):  The participant stated that they 
did not know any of the relevant information in a given 
category. This was scored as completely incorrect. 
An example of scoring: to a participant looking at the 
Holmes ‘Monstrous Costs’ ch art, we would ask question 
Q3: ‘What is the basic trend of the chart?’ If the participant 
responded, ‘I don’t understand,’ we would elaborate: ‘Tell 
me whether the chart shows any changes and describe these 
changes.’ The participant might answer ‘The teeth get 
bigger every year.’ This answer would score 1 point, as it is 
not a complete answer (with incorrect information about the 
period of the data reported) but provides at least some 
information that the bars incr ease. The experimenter would 
then provide additional prompts starting with ‘Can you be 
more specific?’ A complete answer scoring four points 
might be ‘The chart shows that campaign expenditures by 
the house increased by about 50 million dollars every two 
years, starting in 1972 and ending in 1982.’ 
Early in the data collection stage, a second researcher 
reviewed the primary coder’s results by independently 
coding a single participant through a review of the 
interview video. The primary coder also performed an 
additional coding of the same interview, based only on the 
video capture. All three versions, the original coding, the 
second coding by the primary coder, and the alternate 
coding by the second researcher differed only a few times 
and then never more than by one point. 
Preference Questionnaire 
After the recall portion of the experiment, participants were 
asked to choose their preferred chart format for a number of 
questions related to both the description of the charts and 
the recall of the charts. For pa rticipants in the immediate 
recall group, this questionnaire was administered on the 
same day as the description of the charts; for participants in 
the long-term recall group, this questionnaire was 
administered 12-22 days after the initial chart descriptions. 
Gaze Data 
We used the eye tracker throughout the description task to 
get an idea at what people looked at on a chart. For each 
chart, we used the Tobii ‘area of interest’ analysis software 
to designate each type of cont ent that was in a chart. Chart 
content was coded by a single experimenter as one of the 
following (see Figure 3): 
• Data: gazes in the region would be for primarily data 
CHI 2010: Graphs
April 10–15, 2010, Atlanta, GA, USA
2577

• Embellishment: gazes in the region would be for 
primarily non-data imagery 
• Dual coded (Data and Embellishment): it could not 
reasonably be assumed if gazes in the region would be 
for data or imagery  
• Other: any gaze not falling in a specified region 
We removed gaze data for ch arts where gazes did not 
register correctly, which would have resulted from the 
participant shifting or moving out of range of the eyetracker 
during the study. 
data
data
embellishment
dual coded
embellishment
 
Figure 3. Area of interest an alysis: gaze falling in any of 
the areas defined by the blue borders were labeled as 
data, embellishment, dual encoded, or other. 
RESULTS 
We first present the results related to describing the charts, 
followed by the recall results and the user preferences, and 
then analyze the participants ’ gaze data. In all cases we 
used a t-test for analysis; all of our hypotheses and 
questions related to a comparison of two groups (e.g. long-
term vs. immediate recall). We applied a 1-tailed test where 
our stated hypothesis was that one group was significantly 
greater or less for a particular measure.   
Description 
Description scores were calculated from the coded 
responses. After removing data for the two training charts, 
and summing description scores over the remaining charts 
for each participant, we condu cted pairwise t-tests to 
determine whether the presence of visual embellishments 
altered the quality of participant verbal chart descriptions. 
There were no differences in the scores of chart 
descriptions for the s ubject of the chart (t 19=0.84, p=.412), 
the categories in the charts (t 19=1.38, p=.185), or the trend 
of the charts (t 19=0.23, p=.818), depending on whether or 
not visual embellishments were present (see Figure 4). 
There was a difference in the description of a value 
message of the charts (t 19=3.37, p=.003), with better 
descriptions of a value message  for the Holmes charts than 
the plain charts (see Figure 6). 
We also looked at the total completion time for users in 
completing the description task – calculated from the total 
onscreen time spent with each ch art. A pairwise t-test was 
used to determine if the presence of embellishments 
resulted in users spending more time to complete the 
description tasks. There was no difference in completion 
time for describing the charts (t 19=1.834, p=.082), 
depending on the presence of visual embellishments (Mean 
Holmes=2.60min, SD Holmes=0 .67; Mean Plain=2.43min, 
SD Plain=0.68).  
Recall 
Recall scores were calculated from the coded responses. 
After removing data for the two training charts, and 
summing recall scores over th e remaining charts for each 
participant, we conducted pair wise t-tests to determine if 
users were able to better recall charts that contained visual 
embellishments. Because our h ypothesis was that visual 
embellishments would aid recall, we conducted 1-tailed t-
tests with α=0.05. 
For participants in the immediate recall group, there were 
no differences in recall scores for the subject of the chart 
(t9=1.24, p=.124), the cat egories in the chart (t 9=1.21, 
p=.129), or the trend of the chart (t 9=0.35, p=.369) between 
charts that contained visual em bellishments and charts that 
did not (see Figure 5). There was a difference in the recall 
score for the value message (t9=2.24, p=.026), see Figure 6. 
0
10
20
subject cat egories trend
Sum of scores
Holmes
Pl ai n
 
Figure 4. Means ± SE for description scores. 
subject categories trend
Holmes
Pl ai n
long-term recall immediate recall
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
subject categories trend
Sum of  recall scores
 
Figure 5. Means ±S E for recall scores for long-term and 
immediate recall. 
0
2
4
6
descript ion immediate 
recall
long-term
recall
Su m of Sco r es
Holmes
Pl ai n
 
Figure 6. Means ± SE for sum of value message scores. 
For participants in the long-t erm recall group, there were 
significant differences in recall scores for the subject of the 
chart (t9=2.56, p=.015), the cate gories in the chart (t 9=5.03, 
CHI 2010: Graphs
April 10–15, 2010, Atlanta, GA, USA
2578

p≈.000), the trend of the chart (t 9=1.95, p=.042), and the 
value message (t9=2.41, p=.020) between charts with visual 
embellishments and ones without (see Figure 5 & Figure 6). 
In addition, participants in  the long-term recall group 
required more prompting in or der to recall subjects of the 
charts (t 9=2.67, p=.013), categories in the charts (t 9=2.81, 
p=.011), and trends of the charts (t 9=2.45, p=.018) for 
charts that did not contain visual embellishments. However, 
for participants in the immediate recall group, there were no 
differences in the required amount of prompting to recall 
subjects of the charts (t 9=1.41, p=.097), categories in the 
charts (t 9=0.32, p=.379), or trends of the charts (t 9=-0.32, 
p=.379) depending on whether or not charts contained 
visual embellishments (see Figure 7). 
long-term recall immediate recall
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
subject categories trend
S um of prompts
subject categories trend
Holmes
Pl ai n
 
Figure 7. Means ±SE for the number of recall prompts needed 
for long-term and immediate recall. 
User Preferences 
After the recall portion of the experiment, participants were 
asked to choose their preferred chart format for a number of 
questions. Results are shown in Figure 8. Chi-squared tests 
showed that participants most  enjoyed charts with visual 
embellishments (χ2=8.9, p=.003) and found them to be the 
most attractive ( χ2=11.8, p=.001). Participants also found it 
easiest to remember the charts with visual embellishments 
(χ2=15.2, p ≈.000) and to remember the details of these 
charts (χ2=8.9, p=.003). Finally, participants felt that it was 
both fastest to describe ( χ2=4.3, p=.039) and fastest to 
remember ( χ2=11.8, p=.001) charts containing visual 
embellishments. The remaining questions did not produce 
significant differences. 
0
5
10
15
20
Count of responses
Holmes
Plain
 
Figure 8. Count of user responses: *indicates significant 
difference between chart types from chi-squared test at α=0.05 
Gaze Detection 
During the recall portion of the experiment, we recorded 
users’ gaze data to determine what proportion of time was 
spent looking at different aspects of the charts, including 
visual embellishments.  
Holmes charts contained data, embellishments, and areas 
that were both data and embellishments (dual coded). In 
addition, areas of the chart that were not of interest (e.g., 
blank space) were categorized as  ‘other’. Plain charts only 
contained the data and other categories. Based on how long 
participants looked at the screen (sometimes they would 
look off screen or at the experimenter during the study), we 
calculated the proportion of time spent looking at the 
different chart elements. As Figure 9 shows, participants 
spent 67% of their on-screen time looking at data or data 
and embellishments for Holmes charts as compared to 78% 
for Plain charts. For Holmes charts, users spent 27% of 
their on-screen time looking at areas that contained both 
data and embellishments, and 13% of their time looking at 
embellishments that did not communicate any data. 
Although 40% of users’ time was spent looking at 
embellishments for Holmes charts, this did not result in a 
longer time to describe the charts.  
40
78
27
13
20 22
0
20
40
60
80
100
Holmes Standard
Percent
Other
Embellishment
Data/E mbellis hment
Dat a
 
Figure 9. Percentage of on-screen time spent looking at 
different chart elements for Holmes and Plain charts. 
DISCUSSION 
The study showed five main findings: 
• There was no significant difference between plain and 
image charts for interac tive interpretation accuracy 
(i.e., when the charts were visible). 
• There was also no significant difference in recall 
accuracy after a five-minute gap. 
• After a long-term gap (2-3 weeks), recall of both the 
chart topic and the details (categories and trend) was 
significantly better for Holmes charts. 
• Participants saw value messages in the Holmes charts 
significantly more often than in the plain charts.  
• Participants found the Holmes  charts more attractive, 
most enjoyed them, and found that they were easiest 
and fastest to remember. 
In the next sections we propose explanations for these 
results, and then discuss several issues that these results 
raise for the practice of information presentation. 
Why did the extra visual information in the image charts not 
lead to reduced interpretation and recall accuracy? 
Some experts in chart design (and some previous research) 
suggest that the additional information in the Holmes-style 
CHI 2010: Graphs
April 10–15, 2010, Atlanta, GA, USA
2579

image charts should lead to greater difficulty in correctly 
interpreting the data in the chart. This did not happen in our 
study; we propose some possible reasons for our results. 
First, the eye-tracker data suggests that people spent similar 
amounts of time looking at the data portions of the charts, 
regardless of their style, although with the Holmes charts 
the data was sometimes presented through imagery (dual 
coded). If participants’ investigations of the data elements 
in both conditions were equal, it is reasonable that their 
interpretation of that data would be equally accurate.  
It is important to note that we did not constrain the amount 
of time participants had to examine the charts. If viewing 
time was limited, it is possible that people could spend less 
time on the data elements (assuming that they look at both 
data and image in an interleaved fashion).  
Second, the time that people spent looking at non-data 
elements in the image charts may not have hindered their 
interpretation as much as might be supposed. This is 
because the images in the Holmes charts are actually tightly 
connected to the subject and ev en the details of the chart. 
That is, both the overall mess age (which includes the topic) 
and some of the structural elements of the chart (such as the 
trend) are encoded in the imag e. For example, the image of 
the monster in Figure 1 evokes “Monstrous” in the chart’s 
title, and the shape of the mouth and teeth show the 
increasing trend of the bars. the time spent examining the 
image itself may have helped people remember elements of 
the chart, possibly overcomi ng any detrimental effects 
caused by the increase in non-data information.  
Nigel Holmes has in fact stated  that one of the reasons for 
images in his charts is to allow faster pickup of messages:  
I think [Tufte] missed the point of much that I was 
trying to do: TIME magazine charts were aimed at 
lay readers, not unintelligent ones, but busy ones. I 
knew they’d get the point quicker if they were 
somehow attracted to the graphic. ([8], p. 76).  
Whether this comes at the cost of interpretation richness 
will be discussed below – in terms of topics, categories, 
values, and trends, our study shows that the basic elements 
of the chart are correctly interpreted. 
Why was long-term recall better for the image charts? 
There are several possible reas ons why participants were 
able to recall the Holmes charts better than the equivalent 
plain charts. First, as shown in previous research (e.g., 
[4,6,13,14]) the presence of an image along with other 
content provides an additional encoding in memory which 
can improve recall. The images in Holmes’s charts are also 
closely associated with the subj ect of the chart, reinforcing 
people’s memory. 
Second, the Holmes images were all fairly different from 
one another, which may have helped people remember 
specific charts. The plain bar charts, in contrast, all had a 
similar visual appearance (as do all bar charts).  
Third, the user’s emotional response to the imagery in 
embellished charts may be a hidden factor. Whether from 
the subjective preference for th e charts or the emotions 
evoked and associated with th e chart imagery, it could be 
that the emotions, in combination with the visual imagery, 
help to anchor chart details in a viewer’s memory. 
Finally, it is intriguing that participants also remembered 
the details of the Holmes charts better than the plain charts. 
This may have occurred beca use of how closely the image 
is integrated into the chart data – for example, the monster’s 
oddly shaped mouth and teeth show the rising line of the 
data. Remembering the picture, therefore, may also provide 
access to the details of the chart (e.g., the overall trend).  
Why did participants see a value message in the images? 
We believe that people saw value messages in the Holmes 
charts more often because th e images do often convey 
values, and this was likely the intention of the designer. The 
image of a monster (and the word ‘monstrous’ in the title) 
conveys clear negative connota tions that are part of the 
story. It is difficult to imagine using monster imagery with 
other more positive stories, su ch as rising vaccination rates 
or rising life expectancy (“monstrous life expectancy”?). 
It is possible to include visu al imagery in charts that 
reinforces the subject of the chart, but does not provide a 
value judgment. Although this was not true of the images 
used in our study, we present example image charts with no 
value message in Figure 10. 
Design Questions and Implications 
Should imagery be used in charts to improve recall? 
The success of visual imagery in our study raises the 
question of whether designers should be encouraged to use 
images in their charts. This is a potentially contentious 
issue, and there is no way to make a clear recommendation 
either in favour or against visual imagery. In addition, 
further study is needed to consider other aspects of this 
practice before drawing strong conclusions; such as 
different tasks. For example, it could be that a task that 
required detailed analysis of charts is hampered more by 
embellishments, rather than the high-level description task 
that we asked of our participants. One could imagine that in 
some safety-critical systems, such as those used by flight 
control systems, limiting the presentation to the salient 
information would likely be the preferred course.  
Perhaps the most important lesson for designers is that there 
may be more to the usability and utility of charts than is 
currently captured by minimalist design approaches.  
One practical consideration arguing against the use of 
strong imagery in charts is the creativity, effort, and artistic 
ability required to do so. Finding an accompanying graphic 
that fits the story (and does not bring in any unwanted 
connotations), and finding a way to integrate the image into 
the representation of data, are likely to be difficult tasks that 
cannot be done well without a skilled designer. In addition, 
CHI 2010: Graphs
April 10–15, 2010, Atlanta, GA, USA
2580

some charts and some topics may not be amenable to 
Holmes-style visual presentations. 
In the end, the purposes and traditions of the venue are 
likely to dictate the style of charts. As stated by Rock, 
publications can be oriented towards reading or viewing:  
Some things are designed for reading: scholarly 
journals, literary reviews, financial pages, and their 
ilk are fairly impenetrable to the casual page flipper. 
Other objects like USA Today, annual reports, 
fashion magazines, and so on are for looking. … 
Then there are the gray areas. These include 
newsmagazines and textbooks, which imply reading 
but are increasingly about looking. ([16] p. 84).  
It is interesting to consider where the CHI proceedings fits 
into this continuum of reading and looking - we note that 
we shied away from presenting our experimental data in 
Holmes style (although partly from lack of artistic ability). 
In our study we intentionally chose the most extreme type 
of visual embellishment that we could – namely, the full 
cartoon imagery used by Holmes. However, as stated 
earlier, there are several other types of visual 
embellishment that are less extreme, and it is possible that 
these other types will also help people to remember charts, 
without requiring such extensive imagery. 
 
 
Figure 10. Less extreme visual imagery in charts. 
Based on our results, we believe that there will be a 
difference between embellishments that provide images and 
those that do not. Psychology research suggests that 
pictures are useful in terms of memory and recall 
[4,6,14,17], and it is likely that a larger effect would be 
seen with charts that use pi ctures rather than non-image 
embellishments such as textures, colours, or abstract 
shapes. Figure 10 shows examples of possible designs that 
use imagery in less extreme ways. 
The wider problem of bias in charts 
Charts that include strong imagery have been criticized for 
introducing bias into the presentation, but it is worth noting 
that this is only a more explicit attempt to persuade than 
some of the other rhetorical devices that are used in written 
and visual communication. Ther e is a tacit assumption in 
the minimalist approach that by removing embellishment 
and non-data ink, the presentation is made more objective, 
and the data ‘is allowed to speak for itself.’ However, 
despite their different visual style, the two charts in Figure 
1 both tell the same story – that campaign expenditures are 
rising at a higher-than-linear rate – and both characterize 
this trend as ‘monstrous.’ There is therefore no guarantee 
that minimalist charts are free from bias. 
Communication is, in most cases, oriented towards making 
an argument, and few if any pieces of writing are truly 
objective. There are many ways  that even minimalist charts 
can be biased or used in support of a particular story – the 
type of chart, the selection of data, the ordering of bars, the 
scale of axes, the choice of titles and labels – all can be 
used to highlight or hide different aspects of the data.  
Despite these potential adjustments behind the scenes, 
minimal charts still maintain the appearance of objectivity – 
but claiming objectivity is  also a common rhetorical 
technique. As Rock [16] states, 
…images and charts seem to not imply an inherent 
point-of-view. They radiate a kind of false 
objectivity because the c oncept of the image-as-
opinion is difficult for most people to grasp. (p. 86) 
(Note that here ‘image’ implies the visual of even a 
minimalist chart, rather than the image of a Holmes chart). 
The illusion of objectivity (as used in minimalist charts) 
and the use of evocative imagery (as used in Holmes charts) 
are perhaps just different approaches that work at different 
ends of the rhetor ical spectrum. Designers and readers 
should remember that a Holm es chart is not necessarily 
more biased than its plain counterpart – but it may be more 
effective at conveying the value message that is part of the 
overall argument. 
Stepping back another way, it can be noted that the use of 
charts altogether has been seen as a practice that takes away 
from the more expansive, judicious, and nuanced arguments 
that can be made through writing: 
Charts and diagrams are cer tainly useful for offering 
general, relational explications of an issue but they 
necessarily shave away th e ambiguous, nuanced, or 
CHI 2010: Graphs
April 10–15, 2010, Atlanta, GA, USA
2581

obscure aspects of any idea. The information has 
been preprocessed, prechewed; it can only lead to one 
conclusion. ([16], p. 85) 
Although few practitioners would argue for dispensing with 
all charts, it is important fo r designers and readers to 
understand the wide variety of ways in which charts are 
used in support of stories and arguments, and to see chart 
imagery as just one point in this space. 
CONCLUSION 
Many experts suggest that visual embellishments and ‘chart 
junk’ cause interpretation problems and should be removed 
from information charts, but many examples exist of 
embellished charts that se em to be successful. To 
investigate some of the specific  costs and benefits of these 
two approaches to chart design (minimalist and 
embellished), we compared interpretation accuracy and 
long-term recall for plain and ‘Holmes-style’ charts. We 
found that people’s accuracy in describing the embellished 
charts was no worse than for plain charts, and that their 
recall after a two-to-three week gap was significantly better. 
In addition, participants pr eferred the embellished charts. 
Although we are cautious about proposing specific design 
recommendations, it seems clear that there is more to be 
learned about the effects of different types of visual 
embellishment in charts. Our results question some of the 
premises of the minimalist ap proach to chart design, and 
raise issues for designers about how charts are designed and 
used in different publications and different contexts. 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
We thank Nigel Holmes for granting us permission to use 
his images, and the CHI reviewers for their comments. This 
research was supported by NSERC.  
REFERENCES 
1. Blasio, A.J. and Bisantz, A.M. A comparison of the 
effects of data-ink ratio on performance with dynamic 
displays in a monitoring task. J.  Industrial Ergonomics 
30 (2002), 89-101. 
2. Cherry, K.E., Dokey, D.K., Reese, C.M., and Brigman, 
S. Pictorial illustrations enhance memory for sentences 
in younger and older adults. Experimental Aging 
Research 29 (2003), 353-370. 
3. Cleveland, W.S. The Elements of Graphing Data. 
Wadsworth, Monterey, CA, USA, 1985. 
4. Gambrell, L.B. and Jawitz, P.B. Mental imagery, text 
illustrations, and children's story comprehension and 
recall. Reading Research Quarterly 28 (1993), 265-276. 
5. Gillan, D.J. and Richman, E.H. Minimalism and the 
Syntax of Graphs. Human Factors 36, 4 (1994), 619-
644. 
6. Hockley, W.E. The picture superiority effect in 
associative recognition. Memory and Cognition 36 
(2009), 1351-1359. 
7. Holmes, N. Designer’s Guide to Creating Charts and 
Diagrams, Watson-Guptill Publications, 1984. 
8. Holmes, N., Nigel Holmes on Information Design, Jorge 
Pinto Books, New York, 2006. 
9. Inbar, O., Tractinsky, N., and Meyer J. Minimalism in 
Information Visualization - Attitudes towards 
Maximizing the Data-Ink Ratio. Proc. ECCE, ACM 
Press (2007), 185-188. 
10. Kelly, J.D. The Data-Ink Ratio and Accuracy of 
Newspaper Graphs. Journalism Quarterly 66, 3 (1989), 
632-639. 
11. Kulla-Mader, J. Graphs via Ink: Understanding How the 
Amount of Non-data-ink in a Graph Affects Perception 
and Learning. Master’s Thesis, Dept. of Information 
and Library Science, UNC, 2007. 
12.  Levy, E., Zacks, J., Tversky, B., Schiano, D. Gratuitous 
Graphics? Putting Preferences in Perspective. Proc. CHI 
1996, ACM Press (1996), 42-49. 
13. Mather, M. and Nesmith, K. Arousal-enhanced location 
memory for pictures. J. Memory and Language 58, 
(2008), 449-464. 
14. McDaniel, M. A., and Waddill, P. J. The mnemonic 
benefit of pictures in text: Selective enrichment for 
differentially skilled readers. Advances in Psychology 
108, North-Holland/Elsevier (1994), 165-181. 
15. Pressley, M. and Miller, G.E. Effects of illustrations on 
children's listening comprehension and oral prose 
memory. J. Research in Reading 8, 1 (1985), 45-56. 
16. Rock, M., Since When Did ‘USA Today’ Become the 
National Design Ideal? I.D. Magazine, March/April 
1992, 84-86. 
17. Sampson, J.R. Free recall of verbal and non-verbal 
stimuli. Memory and Cognition 22, (1970), 215-221. 
18. Schonlau, M. and Peters, E. Graph Comprehension: An 
Experiment in Displaying Data as Bar Charts, Pie Charts 
and Tables with and without the Gratuitous 3rd 
Dimension, RAND Working Paper WR-618, (2008). 
19. Siegrist, M. The use or misuse of three-dimensional 
graphs to represent lower-dimensional data. Behaviour 
and Information Technology 15, 2 (1996), 96-100. 
20. Spence, I. Visual Psychophysics of Simple Graphical 
Elements. JEP: Human Perception and Performance 
16, 4 (1990), 683-692. 
21. Tractinsky, N. and Meyer, J. Chartjunk or goldgraph? 
Effects of persenataion objectives and content 
desirability on information presentation. MIS Q. 23, 3 
(1999), 397-420. 
22. Tufte, E. R. The Visual Display of Quantitative 
Information. Graphics Press, 1983. 
23. Ware, C. Information visualization: perception for 
design. Morgan Kaufmann, San Fransisco, 2000. 
24. Zacks, J., Levy, E., Tversky, B., and Schiano, D. Graphs 
in Print. In M.Anderson, B. Meyer, and P. Olivier 
(Eds.), Diagrammatic Representation and Reasoning, 
London: Springer-Verlag, (2002). 
CHI 2010: Graphs
April 10–15, 2010, Atlanta, GA, USA
2582