Impact Information, 126 E. 18th Street, #C204, Costa Mesa, CA 92627, (949) 631-3309 
 
The Principles of 
Readability 
 
By 
William H. DuBay

Copyright © 2004 William H. DuBay Page ii 
Copyright 
The Principles of Readability 
25 August 2004 
 2004 William H. DuBay. All Rights Reserved. 
Abstract 
The Principles of Readability gives a short history of literacy studies in the U.S. 
and a short history of research in readability and the readability formulas. 
Readers' Comments 
Please send all comments and suggestions regarding this document to: 
William DuBay 
Impact Information 
126 E. 18th Street, #C204 
Costa Mesa, CA 92627 
Phone: (949) 631-3309 
Email: bdubay@impact-information.com 
Website: http://www.impact-information.com

Copyright © 2004 William H. DuBay Page iii 
Contents 
Introduction ..........................................................................................................1  
Guidelines For Readability..........................................................................2  
The readability formulas..............................................................................2  
Are the readability formulas a problem? .....................................................2  
What is readability?.....................................................................................3  
Content ........................................................................................................3  
The Adult Literacy Studies...................................................................................4  
Grading the reading skills of students..........................................................4  
Grading adult readers ..................................................................................4  
U.S. military literacy surveys—reading on the job......................................4  
U.S. civilian literacy surveys .......................................................................6  
Challenges for technical communicators .....................................................9  
The Classic Readability Studies .........................................................................10  
L. A. Sherman and the statistical analysis of literature..............................10  
Vocabulary-Frequency Lists......................................................................11  
The Classic Readability Formulas .............................................................13  
The New Readability Studies .............................................................................25  
A Community of Scholars .........................................................................26  
The Cloze Test ..........................................................................................27  
Reading Ability, Prior Knowledge, Interest, and Motivation ....................28 
Reading Performance ................................................................................30  
The Measurement of Content ....................................................................31  
Text Leveling ............................................................................................35  
Producing and Transforming Text.............................................................37  
The New Readability Formulas .................................................................43  
Formula Applications ................................................................................55  
Using the Formulas....................................................................................56  
Conclusion..........................................................................................................57  
References ..........................................................................................................59  
Biosketch............................................................................................................72

The Principles of Readability 
Copyright © 2004 William H. DuBay Page iv

Copyright © 2004 William H. DuBay Page 1 
 
RESEARCH Summary 
Over 80 years of research and testing have 
contributed to the worldwide use in many 
languages of the readability formulas. They help 
us improve the text on the level of words and 
sentences, the first causes of reading difficulty. 
 
 
The principles of readability are in  
every style manual. Readability formulas 
are in every word processor. What is  
missing is the research and theory on which they stand. 
The Principles of Readability 
By William H. DuBay 
Introduction 
In 1998, traffic accidents caused 46 percent of all accidental deaths of infants 
and children aged 1 to 14 (National Center for Health Statistics, 2000). One 
study (Johnston et al. 1994) showed that the single strongest risk factor for injury 
in a traffic accident is the improper use of child-safety seats. Another study 
(Kahane 1986) showed that, when correctly used, child safety seats reduce the 
risk of fatal injury by 71 percent and hospitalization by 67 percent.  
To be effective, however, the seats must be installed correctly. Other studies, 
showed that 79 to 94 percent of car seats are used improperly (National Highway 
Traffic Safety Administration 1996, Decina and Knoebel 1997, Lane et al. 
2000).  
Public-health specialists Dr. Mark Wegner and Deborah Girasek (2003) 
suspected that poor comprehension of the installation instructions might 
contribute to this problem. They looked into the readability of the instructions 
and published their findings in the medical journal Pediatrics. The story was 
covered widely in the media. 
The authors referred to the National Adult Literacy Study (National Center for 
Educational Statistics, 1993), which states the average adult in the U.S. reads at 
the 7th grade level. They also cited experts in health literacy who recommend that 
materials for the public be written at the fifth or sixth-grade reading level (Doak 
et al., 1996; Weiss and Coyne, 1997). 
Their study found that the average reading level of the 107 instructions they 
examined was the 10th grade, too difficult for 80 percent adult readers in the U.S. 
When texts exceed the reading ability of readers, they usually stop reading. The 
authors did not address the design, completeness, or the organization of the 
instructions. They did not say that the instructions were badly written. Armed 
with the SMOG readability formula, they found the instructions were written at 
the wrong grade level. You can be sure the manufacturers of the car safety seats 
are scrambling to re-write their instructions.

The Principles of Readability 
Copyright © 2004 William H. DuBay Page 2 
Guidelines For Readability 
In works about technical communication, we are often told how to avoid such 
problems. For example, JoAnn Hackos and Dawn Stephens in Standards for 
Online Communication (1997) ask us to “conform to accepted style standards.” 
They explain: 
Many experts, through much research, have compiled golden rules of 
documentation writing. These rules apply regardless of medium: 
• Use short, simple, familiar words 
• Avoid jargon. 
• Use culture-and-gender-neutral language. 
• Use correct grammar, punctuation, and spelling. 
• Use simple sentences, active voice, and present tense. 
• Begin instructions in the imperative mode by starting sentences with 
an action verb.  
• Use simple graphic elements such as bulleted lists and numbered 
steps to make information visually accessible. 
For more suggestions, we recommend referring to one of many 
excellent books on writing style, especially technical style. 
We all know of technical publications that do not follow these guidelines and are 
read only by a small fraction of the potential readership. One reason may be that 
the writers are not familiar with the background and research of these guidelines.  
This paper looks most carefully at two of the most important elements of 
communication, the reading skills of the audience and the readability of the text. 
The readability formulas 
In the 1920s, educators discovered a way to use vocabulary difficulty and 
sentence length to predict the difficulty level of a text. They embedded this 
method in readability formulas, which have proven their worth in over 80 years 
of application.  
Progress and research on the formulas was something of a secret until the 1950s. 
Writers like Rudolf Flesch, George Klare, Edgar Dale, and Jeanne Chall brought 
the formulas and the research supporting them to the marketplace. The formulas 
were widely used in journalism, research, health care, law, insurance, and 
industry. The U.S. military developed its own set of formulas for technical-
training materials.  
By the 1980s, there were 200 formulas and over a thousand studies published on 
the readability formulas attesting to their strong theoretical and statistical 
validity.  
Are the readability formulas a problem? 
In spite of the success of the readability formulas, they were always the center of 
controversy. When the “plain language” movement in the 1960s resulted in 
legislation requiring plain language in public and commercial documents a 
number of articles attacked the use of readability formulas. They had titles like, 
“Readability: A Postscript” (Manzo 1970), “Readability: Have we gone too far?” 
(Maxwell 1978), “Readability is a Four-letter Word” (Selzer  1981), “Why 
Readability Formulas Fail” (Bruce et al. 1981), “Readability Formulas: Second 
Looks, Second Thoughts“ (Lange 1982), “Readability Formulas: What’s the 
Use?” (Duffy 1985) and “Last Rites for Readability Formulas in Technical 
Communication” (Connaster 1999).

The Principles of Readability 
Copyright © 2004 William H. DuBay Page 3 
Many of the critics were honestly concerned about the limitations of the formulas 
and some of them offered alternatives such as usability testing. Although the 
alternatives are useful and even necessary, they fail to do what the formulas do: 
provide an objective prediction of text difficulty.  
Although the concerns of the formula critics have been amply addressed 
elsewhere (Chall 1984, Benson 1984-1985, Fry 1989b, Dale and Chall 1995, 
Klare 2000), we will examine them again in some detail, with a special regard 
for the needs of technical communication.  
The purpose of this article is to very briefly review the landmark studies on 
readability and the controversy regarding the formulas. I will be happy if you 
learn something of the background of the formulas, what they are good for, and 
what they are not. That knowledge will give you greater confidence and method 
in tailoring your text for a specific audience. 
What is readability? 
Readability is what makes some texts easier to read than others. It is often 
confused with legibility, which concerns typeface and layout. 
George Klare (1963) defines readability as “the ease of understanding or 
comprehension due to the style of writing.” This definition focuses on writing 
style as separate from issues such as content, coherence, and organization. In a 
similar manner, Gretchen Hargis and her colleagues at IBM (1998) state that 
readability, the “ease of reading words and sentences,” is an attribute of clarity. 
The creator of the SMOG readability formula G. Harry McLaughlin (1969) 
defines readability as: “the degree to which a given class of people find certain 
reading matter compelling and comprehensible.” This definition stresses the 
interaction between the text and a class of readers of known characteristics such 
as reading skill, prior knowledge, and motivation.  
Edgar Dale and Jeanne Chall’s (1949) definition may be the most 
comprehensive: “The sum total (including all the interactions) of all those 
elements within a given piece of printed material that affect the success a group 
of readers have with it. The success is the extent to which they understand it, 
read it at an optimal speed, and find it interesting.” 
Content  
Beginning early in the last century in the U.S., studies of the reading ability of 
adults and the readability of texts developed in tandem. Our subject matter falls 
under these headings: 
The Adult Literacy Studies These studies discovered great differences in 
the reading skills of adults in the U.S. and their implications for society.  
The Classic Readability Studies This section looks at the early readability 
studies, which started in the late 19th century and concluded in the 
1940s, with the publication of the popular Flesch and Dale-Chall 
formulas. During this period, publishers, educators, and teachers were 
concerned with finding practical methods to match texts to the skills of 
readers, both students and adults. 
The New Readability Studies Beginning in the 1950s, new developments 
transformed the study of readability, including a new test of reading 
comprehension and the contributions of linguistics and cognitive 
psychology. Researchers explored how the reader’s interest, motivation, 
and prior knowledge affect readability. These studies in turn stimulated 
the creation of new and more accurate formulas.

The Principles of Readability 
Copyright © 2004 William H. DuBay Page 4 
The Adult Literacy Studies 
Grading the reading skills of students 
Before the mid-19th century, schools in the U.S. did not group students according 
to grade. Students learned from books that their families had, often Bibles and 
hornbooks. American educator Horace Mann, who had studied the supervision, 
graded classes, and well-articulated classes of Prussian schools, struggled to 
bring those reforms to America.  
It was not until 1847 that the first graded school opened in Boston with a series 
of books prepared for each grade. Educators found that students learn reading in 
steps, and they learn best with materials written for their current reading level. 
Since then, grouping by grades has functioned as an instructional process that 
continues from the first year of school through high school and beyond.  
Although reading standards were set for each grade, we know that not all 
students in the same class read at the same level. A 7th-grade teacher, for 
example can typically face a classroom of students with reading ability from the 
2nd to the 12th grade. Good teaching practice has long separated students in the 
same class by reading ability for separate instruction (Betts 1946, Barr and 
Dreeben 1984). 
Educators promoted the target reading levels for each class with the use of 
standardized reading tests. William A. McCall and Lelah Crabbs (1926) of the 
Teachers College of Columbia University published Standard Test Lessons in 
Reading. Revised in 1950, 1961, and 1979, these tests became an important 
measure of the reading ability of students in the U.S. These and later reading 
tests typically measure comprehension by having students first read a passage 
and then answer multiple-choice questions.  
The Mc Call-Crabbs reading tests also became important in the development and 
validation of the readability formulas. Later reading tests also used for creating 
and testing formulas for adults and children include the Gates-MacGinitie 
Reading Tests, the Stanford Diagnostic Reading Test, the California Reading 
Achievement Test, the Nelson-Denny Reading Test, the Diagnostic Assessment 
of Reading with Trial Teaching Strategies and the National Assessment of 
Educational Progress (NAEP). 
Grading adult readers 
For a long time, no one thought of grading adults, who were considered either 
literate or illiterate. This began to change with the first systematic testing of 
adults in the U.S. military in 1917. The testing of civilians began in Chicago in 
1937.  
During that first period, investigators discovered that general readers in the U. S. 
were adults of limited reading ability. The average adult was able to read with 
pleasure nothing but the simplest adult materials, usually cheap fiction or 
graphically presented news of the day.  
Educators, corporations, and government agencies responded by providing more 
materials at different reading levels for adults. 
U.S. military literacy surveys—reading on the job 
General George Washington first addressed concerns about the reading skills of 
fighters during the Revolutionary War. He directed chaplains at Valley Forge to 
teach basic skills of reading, writing, and arithmetic to soldiers. Since then, the 
U.S. armed services has invested more in studying workplace literacy than any 
other organization.

The Principles of Readability 
Copyright © 2004 William H. DuBay Page 5 
Since the 50s in the U.S., you have to pass a literacy test to join the Armed 
Services. From such a test and others, the military learns a lot about your 
aptitudes, cognitive skills, and ability to perform on the job. 
It took a while for the military to develop these tests. Over the years, it changed 
the content of the tests and what they measure. Testing literacy advanced in these 
general stages:  
1. During World War I, they focused on testing native intelligence. 
2. The military decided that what they were testing was not so much raw 
intelligence as reading skills. By World War II, they were focusing on 
classifying general learning ability for job placement. 
3. In the 1950s, Congress mandated a literacy requirement for all the 
armed services. The resulting Armed Forces Qualification Test 
(AFQT) prevented people of the lowest 10% of reading ability from 
entering military service. The military then combined AFQT subtest 
with other tests, which differed for each service and sorted recruits into 
different jobs.  
4. In 1976, with the arrival of the All-Volunteer Force, the military 
introduced the Armed Services Vocational Aptitude Battery 
(ASVAB). All military services used this test battery for both screening 
qualified candidates and assessing trainability for classified jobs. 
5. In 1978, an error resulted in the recruitment of more than 200,000 
candidates in the lowest 10% category. The military, with the aid of 
Congress, decided to keep them. The four military services each created 
workplace literacy programs, with contract and student costs over $70 
million. This was a greater enrollment in adult basic education than in 
all such programs of 25 states combined. The results of the workplace 
literacy programs were considered highly successful, with performance 
and promotions “almost normal.” 
6. In 1980, the military further launched the largest study ever in job 
literacy, the Job Performance Measurement/Enlistment Standards 
Project. They invested $36 million in developing measures of job 
performance. Over ten years, the project involved more than 15,000 
troops from all four military services. Dozens of professionals in 
psychological measurement took part in this study. 
7. In 1991, based on these findings, the military raised its standards and 
combined the ASVAB with the AFQT and special aptitude tests from 
all the services into one battery of 10 tests. Both the Army and Navy 
continue to provide workplace-literacy programs for entering recruits 
and for upgrading the literacy skills of experienced personnel (Sticht 
1995, pp 37-38). 
The major findings of the military research were: 
1. Measures of literacy correlate closely with measures of intelligence and 
aptitude. 
2. Measures of literacy correlate closely with the breadth of one’s 
knowledge. 
3. Measures of literacy correlate closely to job performance. Hundreds of 
military studies found no gap between literacy and job performance. 
4. Workplace literacy programs are highly effective in producing, in a 
brief period, significant improvements in job-related reading.

The Principles of Readability 
Copyright © 2004 William H. DuBay Page 6 
5. Advanced readers have vast bodies of knowledge and perform well 
across a large set of domains of knowledge. Poor readers perform 
poorly across these domains of knowledge. This means that, if 
programs of adult literacy are to move students to high levels of 
literacy, they must help them explore and learn across a wide range of 
knowledge (Sticht and Armstrong 1994, pp. 37-38).  
The military studies indicated that achieving high levels of literacy requires 
continued opportunities for life-long learning. Investments in adult literacy 
provide a unique and cost-effective strategy for improving the economy, the 
home, the community, and the schools. 
U.S. civilian literacy surveys 
University of Chicago Study Guy Buswell (1937) of the University of Chicago 
surveyed 1,000 adults in Chicago with different levels of education. He 
measured skills in reading materials such as food ads, telephone directories, and 
movie ads. He also used more traditional tests of comprehension of paragraphs 
and vocabulary. 
Buswell found that reading skills and practices increase as years of education 
increase.  He suggested that an important role of education is to guide readers to 
read more, and that reading more leads to greater reading skill. In turn, this may 
lead one to continue more education, thus leading to greater reading skill. 
 
Fig. 1. Adult literacy in 1937. This study confirmed the relationship between reading 
skill and years of education completed. Sources:     Buswell, G. 1937  pp. 27, 57, 71). 
The National Assessment of Educational Progress (NAEP) of 1970-1971 
This study tested how students 9, 13, and 17 years old as well adults 26 to 35 
years old perform on 21 different tasks. The results showed for the first time how 
age affects performance on the same items. This survey showed as children grow 
up, attend school, and become adults, they grow progressively more literate 
(Sticht and Armstrong, pp. 51-58). 
Louis Harris survey of 1970   The Louis Harris polling organization surveyed 
adults representing a cross section of the U.S. population. The subjects filled out 
five common application forms, including an application for a driver’s license 
and a Medicaid application. 
The poll was the first of many to show that many U.S. citizens have difficulty 
with filling out forms. The Medicaid form was difficult, with only 54 percent of

The Principles of Readability 
Copyright © 2004 William H. DuBay Page 7 
those with an 8th grade education or less getting 90-100 percent correct. Even 
many college-educated adults had trouble completing the Medicaid form (Sticht 
and Armstrong, pp. 59-62). 
Adult Functional Reading Study of 1973   This study used household 
interviews to find out the literacy practices of adults. It used a second household 
sample to assess literacy skills. 
Over all 170 items used in the study, over 70 percent of the respondents scored 
70 percent correct or better. As a trend, adults with more education performed 
better on the test than those with less. 
As with Buswell's study, both literacy skills and literacy practices correlated 
closely with education. Book and magazine reading correlated more closely with 
years of education than did newspaper reading. Altogether, the adults reported 
that they spent about 90 minutes a day in reading materials such as forms, labels, 
signs, bills, and mail. (Sticht and Armstrong, pp. 63-66). 
Adult Performance Level Study of 1971  This study began as a project funded 
by the U. S. Office of Education. It introduced "competency-based" education, 
directing adult education to focus on achieving measurable outcomes. By 1977, 
two-thirds of the states had set up some form of "competency-based" adult basic 
education. 
The test included over 40 common and practical tasks, such as filling out a 
check, reading the want ads, addressing an envelope, comparing advertised 
products, filling out items on a 1040 tax form, reading a tax table, and filling out 
a Social Security application. Results showed the high correlation between 
performance on all tasks and literacy (Sticht and Armstrong, pp. 67-98). 
What a Reading Grade Level Means 
The reading grade level of a text depends on the use of the text. If the text is 
used for independent, unassisted, or recreational use, the reading grade level 
will be higher than a text destined for classroom use and optimum learning 
gain. In other words, the same text will be easier for those with more advanced 
reading skills (with a higher grade level) and harder for those with less (and with 
a lower grade level).  See the “Problem of Optimal Difficulty” below. 
The grade of completed education is no indication of one’s reading level. 
Average high-school graduates read at the 9th-grade level, which means a large 
number reads below that level. Those who pursue special domains of 
knowledge may develop higher levels of reading skill in those specialties than 
they have for general reading. Thus, college graduates, who prefer to read 
general materials at the 10th-grade level, may prefer more difficult texts within 
their own specialty. Students who are poor readers of general classroom 
material are often able to master difficult treatments of subjects that appeal to 
them.   
Young Adult Literacy Survey of 1985  This study of young adults (17-25)  and 
the adult study that followed in 1992 both measured the literacy the same way in 
three areas: 
• Prose literacy—meaning of selected texts 
• Document literacy—finding information on a form such as a bus 
schedule. 
• Quantitive literacy—mathematical and spatial tasks. 
Both studies used a literacy scoring range of 1 to 500 and the five levels of skill 
defined by the National Assessment of Educational Progress (1985). John 
Carroll (1987) estimated the corresponding reading-grade levels as shown in 
Table 1.

The Principles of Readability 
Copyright © 2004 William H. DuBay Page 8 
NAEP Level Literacy Score Grade Level 
I Rudimentary 150 1.5 
II Basic 200 3.6 
III Intermediate 250 7.2 
IV Adept 300 12 
V Advanced 350 16+ 
Table 1. NAEP proficiency levels and the reading-grade-level 
equivalents. 
The young adult survey by the NAEP (1985) found that only 40 percent of 
young adults 17 to 25 no longer in high school, and 17 years old and in high 
school, read at a 12th-grade level. Large numbers leave high school still reading 
at the 8th-grade level or lower. The 1990 census showed that 24.8 percent of 
adults did not graduate from high school. 
The National Adult Literacy Survey (NALS) of 1992  This U.S. Government 
study sampled 26,000 adults, representing 191 million adults. In 1993, it 
published the first of a number of reports on this survey entitled, "Adult Literacy 
in America” (National Center for Education Statistics 1993, 1999, 2001).   
This study used the same tests as the Young Adult Literacy Survey and reported 
data with the same five levels of skill.  
Literacy Skill Level 1  Level 2 Level 3 Level 4 Level 5 
Prose 21% 27% 32% 17% 3% 
Document 23% 28% 31% 15% 3% 
Quantitative 22% 25% 31% 17% 4% 
Table 2. Percentages of adults in the U.S. in each of the five NAEP skill levels for each 
literacy skill (Sticht and Armstrong 1995, p. 113). 
The data in this table suggest 40 to 44 million adults in the U.S. are in Level 1, 
defined as “functionally illiterate, not having enough reading skills for daily 
life.” Some 50 million are in Level 2. This means the percentage of adults who 
struggle at Levels 1 and 2 (below the 5th-grade level) in the U.S. reaches 48 
percent. 
The report confirmed that numeracy (quantitative) skills increase with reading 
skills. Adults of different reading skills not only have different worldviews but 
also different life experiences. Forty-three percent of adults with low-literacy 
skills live in poverty, 17% receive food stamps, and 70% have no job or part-
time job. Over 60 % of frontline workers producing goods have difficulty 
applying information from a text to a task. More than 20% of adults read below 
the sixth-grade level, far below the level needed to earn a living wage.  
Adults at Level 1 earned a median income of $240 a week, while those at Level 
5 earned $681. Seventy percent of prisoners are in the lowest two levels.   
In support of these figures, the number of companies reporting shortages of 
skilled workers doubled between 1995 and 1998. Ninety percent of Fortune 
1000 executives reported that low literacy is hurting productivity and 
profitability. In one survey, more than half of the responding company 
representatives said that high school graduates applying for jobs are not literate 
enough to hire. 
Low levels of literacy have caused costly and dangerous mistakes in the 
workplace. There are other costs in billions of dollars in the workplace resulting 
from low productivity, poor quality of products and services, mistakes, 
absenteeism, and lost management time.

The Principles of Readability 
Copyright © 2004 William H. DuBay Page 9 
The Adult Literacy Survey also confirmed the effects of literacy on health care. 
Since 1974, when health officials became aware of the effects of low literacy on 
health, literacy problems have grown. A more complex health-care system 
requires better reading skills to negotiate the system and take more responsibility 
for self-care. 
Using a nationally representative sample of the U.S. adult population age 16 and 
older, the National Academy (2002) on an Aging Society examined the impact 
of literacy on the use of health care services. The study found that people with 
low health-literacy skills use more health care services.  
Among adults who stayed overnight in a hospital in 1994, those with low health 
literacy skills averaged 6 percent more hospital visits, and stayed in the hospital 
nearly 2 days longer than adults with higher health literacy skills. The added 
health-care costs of low literacy are estimated at $73 billion in 1998 dollars. This 
includes $30 billion for the Level 2 population plus $43 billion for the Level 1 
population. The total is about what Medicare pays for doctor services, dental 
services, home health care, prescription drugs, and nursing-home care combined. 
Low literacy is not chiefly the problem of immigrants, the elderly, high school 
dropouts, or people whose first language is not English. Low literacy is a 
problem that knows no age, education, income levels, or national origins. Most 
people with low literacy skills were born in this country and have English as 
their first language.  
One solution to the problem of low literacy of adults is more government and 
corporate support for adult literacy programs. Workplace literacy programs have 
cost-effective and lasting results. Another solution is to produce more texts that 
are written for people of diverse reading skills. 
Challenges for technical communicators 
The lessons of the literacy studies for technical communicators are obvious: 
• Low and intermediate literacy skills are a big problem for large 
numbers of users of technical documents. Providing technical 
documents at their levels will advance both their technical and reading 
skills.  
• The larger the audience, the more it will include the average reading 
habits and skills of the public as determined by the literacy surveys. 
• The more critical the information is for safety and health, the greater is 
the need for increased readability. 
The finding that the great majority of adult readers are mid-range, intermediate 
readers brings to us in technical communication new opportunities and 
challenges. 
Intermediate readers represent a large audience that technical documents have 
been missing. Go into any library or bookstore, and you will find few technical 
or scientific publications in the “Young Adult” section, or elsewhere written at 
the 7th to 9th-grade level. On the Internet, there is the same scarcity of 
intermediate technical materials.  
For example, a small sampling of the author’s shows that the support sections of 
the Apple and Microsoft Web sites are written at advanced level of 10th grade 
and up. The technical books for Dummies and Idiots, while written in a casual 
style, are often at the 10th-grade level and up. Like the car-safety seat 
instructions, these technical documents are too difficult for 80 percent of adult 
readers in the U.S. Ironically, the user manual that comes with the CorelDraw

The Principles of Readability 
Copyright © 2004 William H. DuBay Page 10 
program is written at the 7th-grade level, making it fit for a much larger audience 
than its Dummies counterpart. 
Considering the keen interest that intermediate readers of all ages can have in 
technical matters, this literacy gap is troubling. While some highly motivated 
readers are able to master difficult technical materials, we cannot assume that 
everyone will do so. To the contrary, the difficulty of technical materials has 
taught many if not most readers of intermediate skill not to look for technical 
help in written texts. Helpful text means not only providing readers accurate 
information but also information written at the reading levels they need. 
The Classic Readability Studies 
The first aim of the classic readability studies was to develop practical methods 
to match reading materials with the abilities of students and adults. These efforts 
centered on making easily applied readability formulas which teachers and 
librarians could use. 
The first adult literacy surveys in the U.S. in the 1930s brought new concerns 
about providing graded texts for adults. For the rest of the century, publishers, 
librarians, teachers, and investigators addressed that need with new methods of 
determining the reading level of texts. 
The classic readability studies include these landmark issues: 
• L. A. Sherman and the statistical analysis of literature. 
• The vocabulary-frequency lists 
• The classic readability formulas  
L. A. Sherman and the statistical analysis of literature 
Down through the centuries, many had written about the differences between an 
“ornate” and “plain” style in English.  
In 1880, a professor of English Literature at the University of Nebraska, Lucius 
Adelno Sherman, began to teach literature from a historical and statistical point 
of view.  
He compared the older prose writers with more popular modern writers such as 
Macaulay (The History of England) and Ralph Waldo Emerson. He noticed a 
progressive shortening of sentences over time.  
He decided to look at this statistically and began by counting average sentence 
length per 100 periods. In his book (1893), Analytics of Literature, A Manual for 
the Objective Study of English Prose and Poetry, he showed how sentence-
length averages shortened over time: 
• Pre-Elizabethan times: 50 words per sentence  
• Elizabethan times: 45 words per sentence  
• Victorian times: 29 words per sentence 
• Sherman’s time: 23 words per sentence.  
In our time, the average is down to 20 words per sentence.  
Sherman’s work set the agenda for a century of research in reading. It proposed 
the following: 
• Literature is a subject for statistical analysis. 
• Shorter sentences and concrete terms increase readability. 
• Spoken language is more efficient than written language.

The Principles of Readability 
Copyright © 2004 William H. DuBay Page 11 
• Over time, written language becomes more efficient by becoming more 
like spoken language. 
Sherman also showed how individual writers are remarkably consistent in their 
average sentence lengths. This consistency was to become the basis for the 
validity of using samples of a text rather than the whole thing for readability 
prediction. 
Sherman was the first to use statistical analysis for the task of analyzing 
readability, introducing a new and objective method of literary criticism. 
Another of Sherman’s discoveries was that over time sentences not only became 
shorter but also simpler and less abstract. He believed this process was due to the 
influence of the spoken language on written English. He wrote (p. 312):  
Literary English, in short, will follow the forms of the standard spoken 
English from which it comes. No man should talk worse than he writes, 
no man writes better than he should talk…. The oral sentence is clearest 
because it is the product of millions of daily efforts to be clear and 
strong. It represents the work of the race for thousands of years in 
perfecting an effective instrument of communication. 
Linguistic research later confirmed Sherman’s view of the relationship between 
spoken and written language. Rudolf Flesch (1946) wrote that English is 
following written Chinese in making language simpler by substituting standard 
word order (subject-verb-object) for more complex grammar. 
According to Flesch, Chinese is “the most grown-up talk of mankind. It is the 
way people speak who started to simplify their language thousands of years 
 
Fig.2. In Analytics of Literature, L.A. 
Sherman looked at literature statistically. 
He showed the importance of average 
sentence length and the relationship 
between spoken and written English. 
ago and have kept at it ever since…. 
(p. 12).  
 “Among the world’s great languages, the 
runner-up to Chinese is English. It’s 
simpler, more flexible, more practical than 
any other Western language because it has 
gone furthest in losing inflections and 
straightening out irregularities” (p. 20)  
Sherman’s most important point was the 
need to involve the reader. He wrote: 
The universally best style is not a thing 
of form merely, but must regard the 
expectations of the reader as to the spirit 
and occasion of what is written. It is not 
addressed to the learned, but to all 
minds. Avoiding book-words, it will use 
only the standard terms and expressions 
of common life… It will not run in long 
and involved sentences that cannot 
readily be understood. Correct in all 
respects, it will not be stiff; familiar, but 
safely beyond all associations of 
vulgarity (p. 327).  
Vocabulary-Frequency Lists 
During the 1920s, two major trends stimulated a new interest in readability: 
1. A changing school population, especially an increase in “first 
generation” secondary school students, the children of immigrants. 
Teachers reported that these students found textbooks too difficult.

The Principles of Readability 
Copyright © 2004 William H. DuBay Page 12 
2. The growing use of scientific tools for studying and objectively 
measuring educational problems.  
One such tool, Thorndike’s Teacher’s Word Book (1921), was the first extensive 
listing of words in English by frequency. It provided teachers with an objective 
means for measuring the difficulty of words and texts. It laid the foundation for 
almost all the research on readability that would follow.  
Its author, psychologist Edward. L. Thorndike of Columbia University, noticed 
that teachers of languages in Germany and Russia were using word counts to 
match texts with students. The more frequent a word is used, they found, the 
more familiar it is and the easier to use. As we learn and grow, our vocabulary 
grows as does our ability to master longer and more complex sentences. How 
much that continues to grow depends on how much reading is done throughout 
life. 
A vocabulary test on the meaning of words is the strongest predictor of verbal 
and abstract intellectual development. The knowledge of words has always been 
a strong measure of a reader’s development, reading comprehension, and verbal 
intelligence. Chall and Dale (1995, p. 84) write, “It is no accident that 
vocabulary is also a strong predictor of text difficulty.” 
It happens that the first words we learn are the simplest and shortest. These first, 
easy words are also the words we use most frequently. Most people do not 
realize the extent of this frequency. Twenty-five percent of the 67,200 words 
used in the 24 life stories written by university freshmen consisted of these ten 
words: the, I, and, to, was, my, in, of, a, and it (Johnson, 1946). The first 100 
most frequent words make up almost half of all written material. The first 300 
words make up about 65 percent of it (Fry et al, 1993).  
Around 1911, Thorndike began to count the frequency of words in English texts. 
In 1921, he published The Teacher’s Word Book, which listed 10,000 words by 
frequency of use. In 1932, he followed up with A Teacher’s Word Book of 
20,000 Words, and in 1944 with Irving Lorge, A Teacher’s Word Book of 30,000 
Words. 
Until computers came along, educators, publishers, and teachers commonly used 
word-frequency lists to evaluate reading materials for their classes. Thorndike’s 
work also was the basis for the first readability formulas for children’s books.  
After Thorndike, there was extensive research on vocabulary. The high mark 
came in Human Behavior and The Principle of Least Effort by Harvard’s 
George Kingsley Zipf (1949).  
Zipf used a statistical analysis of language to show how the principle of least 
effort works in human speech. Zipf showed that, in many languages, there is a 
mathematical relationship between the hard and easy words, now called Zipf’s 
curve. This notion of saving energy is a central feature of language and is one of 
the principle bases of research on the frequency of words. 
Klare (1968), reviewing the research on word frequency, concludes: “Not only 
do humans tend to used some words much more often than others, they recognize 
more frequent words more rapidly than less frequent, prefer them, and 
understand and learn them more readily. It is not surprising, therefore, that this 
variable has such a central role in the measurement of readability.” 
Dale and O’Rourke: the words Americans know  In 1981, publishers of the 
World Book Encyclopedia published The Living Word Vocabulary: A National 
Vocabulary Inventory by Edgar Dale and Joseph O’Rourke. The authors based 
this work on the earlier work of Thorndike and others as well as on a 25-year 
study of their own. It contained the grade-level scores of the familiarity of

The Principles of Readability 
Copyright © 2004 William H. DuBay Page 13 
44,000 words. For the first time, it gave scores for each of the meanings a word 
can have and the percentage of readers in the specified grade who are familiar 
with the word. 
The authors obtained the familiarity scores by giving a three-choice test to 
students from the 4th to the 16th grade in schools and colleges throughout the 
U.S. The editors of the encyclopedia also used the scores to test the readability 
of the articles they published. Field tests of the encyclopedia later confirmed the 
validity of the word scores. This work is exceptional in every respect and is 
considered by many to be the best aid in writing for a targeted grade level.  
 
 
Fig. 3. Sample entries from The Living Word Vocabulary. This 
work featured not only grade level and a short definition, but 
also the percentage of readers in that grade who know the 
word. The editors of World Book Encyclopedia used this 
information as one of the reading-level tests for their entries 
(Dale and O’Rourke 1981). 
In the preface, the Editorial Director of the encyclopedia W. H. Nault wrote (p. 
v) that this work marked “the beginning of a revolutionary approach to the 
preparation and presentation of materials that fit not only the reading abilities, 
but the experience and background of the reader as well.” 
Although this work is out of print, you can find it at libraries and used bookshops 
along with other graded vocabularies and word-frequency lists such as The 
American Heritage Word Frequency Book.   
The Classic Readability Formulas 
Harry D. Kitson—Different readers, different styles  Psychologist Harry D. 
Kitson (1921) published The Mind of the Buyer, in which he showed how and 
why readers of different magazines and newspapers differed from one another. 
Although he was not aware of Sherman’s work, he found that sentence length 
and word length measured in syllables are important measures of readability. 
Rudolph Flesch would incorporate both these variables in his Reading Ease 
formula 30 years later. 
Although Kitson did not create a readability formula, he showed how his 
principles worked in analyzing two newspapers, the Chicago Evening Post and 
the Chicago American and two magazines, the Century and the American. He 
analyzed 5000 consecutive words and 8000 consecutive sentences in the four 
publications. His study showed that the average word and sentence length were 
shorter in the Chicago American newspaper than in the Post, and the American 
magazine’s style simpler than the Century’s, accounting for the differences in 
their readership.

The Principles of Readability 
Copyright © 2004 William H. DuBay Page 14 
The first readability formula  Bertha Lively and S. L. Pressey (1923) were 
concerned with the practical problem of selecting science textbooks for junior 
high school. The books were so overlaid with technical words that teachers spent 
all class time teaching vocabulary. They argued that it would be helpful to have a 
way to measure and reduce the “vocabulary burden” of textbooks.  
Their article featured the first children’s readability formula. It measured the 
number of different words in each 1,000 words and the number of words not on 
the Thorndike list of 10,000 words. Their method produced a correlation 
coefficient of .80 when tested on 700 books. 
In reading research, investigators look for correlations instead of causes. A 
correlation coefficient (r = ) is a descriptive statistic that can go from +1.00 to 
0.0 or from 0.0 to –1.00. Both +1.00 and  –1.00 represent a perfect correlation, 
depending on whether the elements are positively or negatively correlated.  
A coefficient of 1.00 shows that, as one element changes, the other element 
changes in the same (+) or opposite (-) direction by a corresponding amount. A 
coefficient of .00 means no correlation, that is, no corresponding relationship 
through a series of changes.  
For example, if a formula should predict a 9th-grade level of difficulty on a 7th-
grade text, and, if at all grade levels, the error is in the same direction and by a 
corresponding amount, the correlation could be +1.00 or at least quite high. If, 
on the other hand, a formula predicts a 9th-grade level for a 6th-grade text, an 8th 
grade level for a 10th-grade text, and has similar variability in both directions, the 
correlation would be very low, or even 0.00. 
Squaring the correlation coefficient ( r2 = ) gives the percentage of 
accountability for the variance. For example, the Lively and Pressey formula 
above accounts for 64% (.802) of the variance of the text difficulty. 
Other early school formulas  Mabel Vogel and Carleton Washburne (1928) of 
Winnetka, Illinois carried out one of the most important studies of readability. 
They were the first to study the structural characteristics of the text and the first 
to use a criterion based on an empirical evaluation of text. They studied ten 
different factors including kinds of sentences and prepositional phrases, as well 
as word difficulty and sentence length. Since, however, many factors correlated 
highly with one another, they chose four for their new formula. 
Following Lively and Pressey, they validated their formula, called the Winnetka 
formula, against 700 books that had been named by at least 25 out of almost 
37,000 children as ones they had read and liked. They also had the mean reading 
scores of the children, which they used as a difficulty measure in developing 
their formula. Their new formula correlated highly ( r = .845) with the reading 
test scores.  
With this formula, investigators knew that they could objectively match the 
grade level of a text with the reading ability of the reader. The match was not 
perfect, but it was better than subjective judgments. The Winnetka formula, the 
first one to predict difficulty by grade levels, became the prototype of modern 
readability formulas. 
Vogel and Washburne’s work stimulated the interest of Alfred S. Lewerenz 
(1929, 1929a, 1935, 1939), who produced several new readability formulas for 
the Los Angeles School District.  
W. W. Patty and W. I. Painter (1931) discovered the year of highest burden in 
high school is the sophomore year. They also developed a formula to measure 
the relative difficulty of textbooks based on a combination of frequency as

The Principles of Readability 
Copyright © 2004 William H. DuBay Page 15 
determined by the Thorndike list and vocabulary diversity (the number of 
different words in a text). 
With the rise of the plain-language movement in the 1960s, several critics of the 
formulas claimed that the formulas do not test comprehensibility (Kern 1979, 
Duffy and Kabance 1981, Duffy 1985). The research, however, shows that from 
the beginning their scores correlate well with comprehension difficulty as 
measured by reading tests. The formulas rate very well when compared with 
other widely used psychometric measurements such as reading tests (Chall and 
Dale 1995). Their validity correlations make them useful for predicting the 
comprehension difficulty of texts (Bormuth 1966).  
Waples and Tyler: What adults read  During the Depression in the ‘30s, adult 
education and the increased use of libraries stimulated studies in reading. 
Sociologists studied “who reads what and why over consecutive periods,” 
looking at reading as an aspect of mass communication. 
Douglas Waples and Ralph W. Tyler (1931)  published What People Want to 
Read About, a comprehensive, two-year study of adult reading interests. Instead 
of using the traditional library circulation records to determine reading patterns, 
they interviewed people divided by sex and occupation into 107 different groups. 
It showed the types and styles of materials that people not only read but also 
want to read. It also studied what they did not read and why.  
They found that the reading of many people is limited because of the lack of 
suitable material. Readers often like to expand their knowledge, but the reading 
materials in which they are interested are too difficult.  
Ralph Ojemann: The difficulty of adult materials  The year 1934 marked the 
beginning of more rigorous standards for the formulas. Ralph Ojemann (1934) 
did not invent a formula, but he did invent a method of assessing the difficulty of 
materials for adult parent-education materials. His criterion was 16 passages of 
about 500 words taken from magazines. He was the first to use adults to 
establish the difficulty of his criterion. He assigned each passage the grade level 
of adult readers who were able to answer at least one-half of the multiple-choice 
questions about the passage. 
Ojemann was then able to correlate six factors of vocabulary difficulty and eight 
factors of composition and sentence structure with the difficulty of the criterion 
passages. He found that the best vocabulary factor was the difficulty of words as 
stated in the Thorndike word list.  
Even more important was the emphasis that Ojemann put on the qualitative 
factors such as abstractness. He recommended using his 16 passages for 
comparing and judging the difficulty of other texts, a method that is now known 
as scaling (See “Text leveling” below). Although he was not able to express the 
qualitative variables in numeric terms, he succeeded in proving they could not be 
ignored.  
Dale and Tyler: Adults of limited reading ability After working with Waples, 
Ralph Tyler became interested in adults of limited reading ability. He joined 
with Edgar Dale to publish (1934) their own readability formula and the first 
study on adult readability formulas. The specific contribution of this study was 
the use of materials specifically designed for adults of limited reading ability. 
Their criterion for developing the formula was 74 selections on personal health 
taken from magazines, newspapers, textbooks, and adaptations from children’s 
health textbooks. They determined the difficulty of the passages with multiple-
choice questions based on the texts given to adults of limited reading ability.

The Principles of Readability 
Copyright © 2004 William H. DuBay Page 16 
From the 29 factors that had been found significant for children’s 
comprehension, they found ten that were significant for adults. They found that 
three of these factors correlated so highly with the other factors that they alone 
gave almost the same prediction as the combined ten. They were: 
• Number of different technical words.  
• Number of different hard non-technical words. 
• Number of indeterminate clauses. 
They combined these three factors into a formula to predict the proportion of 
adult readers of limited reading ability who would be able to understand the 
material. The formula correlated .511 with difficulty as measured by multiple-
choice reading tests based on the 74 criterion selections.  
The Ojemann and Dale-Tyler studies mark the beginning of work on adult 
formulas that would continue unabated until the present time. 
Lyman Bryson: Books for the average reader  During the depression of the 
1930’s, the government in the U.S. put enormous resources into adult education. 
Bryson Lyman first became interested in non-fiction materials written for the 
average adult reader while serving as a leader in adult-education meetings in 
New York City. What he found was that what kept people from reading more 
was not lack of intelligence, but the lack of reading skills, a direct result of 
limited schooling.  
He also found out there is a tendency to judge adults by the education their 
children receive and to assume the great bulk of people have been through high 
school. At that time, 40 to 50 million people had a 7th to 9th grade education and 
reading ability.  
Writers had assumed that readers had an equal education to their own or at least 
an equal reading ability. Highly educated people failed to realize just how much 
easier it is for them to read than it is for an average person. They found it 
difficult to recognize difficult writing because they read so well themselves. 
Although college and business courses had long promoted ideas expressed in a 
direct and lucid style, Bryson found that simple and clear language was rare. He 
said such language results from “a discipline and artistry which few people who 
have ideas will take the trouble to achieve… If simple writing were easy, many 
of our problems would have been solved long ago” (Klare and Buck, p. 58). 
Bryson helped set up the Readability Laboratory of the Columbia University 
Teachers College with Charles Beard and M. A. Cartwright. The purpose of the 
laboratory was not to rewrite the classics or to help the beginning reader. The 
purpose was to produce readable books on serious subjects for the average 
citizen.  
Bryson understood that people with enough motivation and time could read 
difficult material and improve their reading ability. Experience, however, 
showed him that most people do not do that.  
Perhaps Bryson’s greatest contribution was the influence he had on his two 
students, Irving Lorge and Rudolf Flesch.  
Gray and Leary: what makes a book readable  William S. Gray and Bernice 
Leary (1935) published a landmark work in reading research, What Makes a 
Book Readable. Like Dale and Tyler’s work, it attempted to discover what 
makes a book readable for adults of limited reading ability. 
Their criterion included 48 selections of about 100 words each, half of them 
fiction, taken from the books, magazines, and newspapers most widely read by 
adults. They established the difficulty of these selections by a reading-

The Principles of Readability 
Copyright © 2004 William H. DuBay Page 17 
comprehension test given to about 800 adults designed to test their ability to get 
the main idea of the passage.  
No subsequent work has examined readability so thoroughly or investigated so 
many style elements or the relationships between them. The authors first 
identified 228 elements that affect readability and grouped them under these four 
headings: 
1. Content 
2. Style 
3. Format 
4. Features of Organization 
The authors found that content, with a slight margin over style, was most 
important. Third in importance was format, and almost equal to it, “features of 
organization,” referring to the chapters, sections, headings, and paragraphs that 
show the organization of ideas (See Figure 4). 
 
Fig 4. The four major categories of readability (Gray and Leary, p. 31). 
They found they could not measure content, format, or organization statistically, 
though many would later try (See below, “The measurement of content”). While 
not ignoring the other three causes, Gray and Leary concentrated on 80 variables 
of style, 64 of which they could reliably count. They gave several tests to about a 
thousand people. Each test included several passages and questions to show how 
well the subjects understood them.

The Principles of Readability 
Copyright © 2004 William H. DuBay Page 18 
 
Fig. 5. The four basic elements of reading ease. 
Having a measure, now, of the difficulty of each passage, they were able to see 
what style variables changed as the passage got harder. They used correlation 
coefficients to show those relationship.  
Of the 64 countable variables related to reading difficulty, those with 
correlations of .35 or above were the following (p.115): 
1. Average sentence length in words: -.52 (a negative correlation, that is, 
the longer the sentence the more difficult it is). 
2. Percentage of easy words: .52 (the larger the number of easy words the 
easier the material). 
3. Number of words not known to 90% of sixth-grade students: -.51 
4. Number of “easy” words: .51 
5. Number of different “hard” words: -.50 
6. Minimum syllabic sentence length: -.49 
7. Number of explicit sentences: .48 
8. Number of first, second, and third-person pronouns: .48 
9. Maximum syllabic sentence length, -.47 
10. Average sentence length in syllables, -.47 
11. Percentage of monosyllables: .43 
12. Number of sentences per paragraph: .43 
13. Percentage of different words not known to 90% of sixth-grade 
students: -.40 
14. Number of simple sentences: .39 
15. Percentage of different words: -.38 
16. Percentage of polysyllables: -.38 
17. Number of prepositional phrases: -35 
Although none of the variables studied had a higher correlation than .52, the 
authors knew by combining variables, they could reach higher levels of 
correlation. Because combining variables that were tightly related to each other 
did not raise the correlation coefficient, they needed to find which elements were 
highly predictive but not related to each other.  
Gray and Leary used five of the above variables, numbers 1, 5, 8, 15, and 17, to 
create a formula, which has a correlation of .645 with reading-difficulty scores. 
An important characteristic of readability formulas is that one that uses more 
variables may be only minutely more accurate but much more difficult to 
measure and apply. Later formulas that use fewer variables may have higher 
correlations.

The Principles of Readability 
Copyright © 2004 William H. DuBay Page 19 
Gray and Leary’s work stimulated an enormous effort to find the perfect 
formula, using different combinations of the style variables. In 1954, Klare and 
Buck listed 25 formulas for children and another 14 for adult readers. By 1981, 
Klare noted there were over 200 published formulas. 
Research eventually established that the two variables commonly used in 
readability formulas–a semantic (meaning) measure such as difficulty of 
vocabulary and a syntactic (sentence structure) measure such as average sentence 
length–are the best predictors of textual difficulty.  
Some experts consider the number of morphemes for each 100 words to be a 
major contributor to semantic (meaning) difficulty and the number of Yngve 
word depths (branches) in each sentence to be a major contributor to syntactic 
(sentence) difficulty. One study (Coleman 1971) showed that Flesch’s index of 
syllables for each 100 words correlates .95 with morpheme counts. Another 
study (Bormuth 1966) found that the number of words in each sentence 
correlates .86 with counts of Yngve word depths. Measuring the average number 
of syllables per word and the number of words in each sentence is a much easier 
method and almost as accurate as measuring morphemes and word depths.  
Formula limitations  Readability researchers have long taken pains to 
recommend that, because of their limitations, formulas are best used in 
conjunction with other methods of grading and writing texts. Ojemann (1934) 
warned that the formulas are not to be applied mechanically, a caution expressed 
throughout readability literature. Other investigators concerned with the 
difficulty and density of concepts were Morriss and Holversen (1938) and Dolch 
(1939). E. Horn (1937) warned against the mechanical use of the word lists in 
the re-writing of books for social studies. 
George Klare and colleagues (1969) stated, “For these reasons, formula scores 
are better thought of as rough guides than as highly accurate values. Used as 
rough guides, however, scores derived from readability formulas provide quick, 
easy help in the analysis and placement of educational material.” 
Readability researchers such as Flesch (1949, 1964, 1979), Klare and Buck 
(1954), Klare (1980), Gunning (1952), Dale (1967), Gilliland (1972), and Fry 
(1988) wrote extensively on the other rhetorical factors that require attention 
such as organization, content, coherence, and design. Using the formulas 
creatively along with techniques of good writing results in greater 
comprehension by an audience of a specified reading ability (Klare 1976, Chall 
and Conard 1991). 
Irving Lorge: Consolidating the research. Irving Lorge (1938) published The 
Semantic Count of the 570 Commonest English Words, a frequency count of the 
meaning of words rather than the words themselves. He later he was co-author  
of E. L. Thorndike’s last book, The Teacher’s Word Book of 30,000 Words 
(1944).  
Lorge was interested in psychological studies of language and human learning. 
At Columbia, he came under the influence of Bryson at the Readability Lab. He 
wanted a simple formula for predicting the difficulty of children’s books in terms 
of grade scores. For the criterion for his own formula, Lorge (1939) used the 376 
selections taken from the McCall-Crabbs Standard Test Lessons in Reading 
(1926). He then standardized those passages on the basis of questions answered 
by children in terms of the Thorndike-McCall Reading Scale. Using correlation 
techniques, he was able to show that various combinations of factors gave 
predictions of higher accuracy than the Gray-Leary formula.

The Principles of Readability 
Copyright © 2004 William H. DuBay Page 20 
Though created for children’s reading, Lorge’s formula was soon widely used 
for adult material as well. Where Gray and Leary’s formula had five elements, 
Lorge’s had three, setting a trend that was to follow: 
• Average sentence length in words 
• Number of prepositional phrases per 100 words 
• Number of hard words not on the Dale list of 769 words. 
Lorge’s use of the McCall-Crabbs Standard Test Lessons in Reading as a 
criterion of difficulty greatly simplified the problem of matching readers to texts 
(Klare, 1985). Although these passages were far from ideal, they had fewer faults 
than other passages used as criteria. They remained the standard for readability 
studies until the Bormuth studies in 1969.  
The problem of communication to masses of people became especially obvious 
during World War II. The government bureaus and the armed services needed 
efficient ways of assessing the readability of their materials. Lorge’s formula was 
one of the first, and it came into wide use (Klare and Buck, p. 59). 
Rudolf Flesch and the art of plain writing  The one perhaps most responsible 
for publicizing the need for readability was Rudolf Flesch, a colleague of Lorge 
at Columbia University. Besides working as a readability consultant, lecturer, 
and teacher of writing, he published a number of studies and nearly 20 popular 
books on English usage and readability. His best-selling books included The Art 
of Plain Talk (1946), The Art of Readable Writing (1949), The Art of Clear 
Thinking (1951), Why Johnny Can’t Read — And What You Can Do About It 
(1955), The ABC of Style: A Guide to Plain English (1964), How to Write in 
Plain English: A Book for Lawyers and Consumers (1979).  
Flesch was born in Austria and got a degree in law from the University of 
Vienna in 1933. He practiced law until 1938, when he came to the U.S. as a 
refugee from the Nazis.  
 
Fig. 6. Rudolf Flesch. The first 
edition of The Art of Plain Talk in 
1946 was a best seller. The 
readability formulas it featured 
started a revolution in journalism 
and business communication. 
Since his law degree was not recognized, he worked 
several other jobs, one of them in the shipping 
department of a New York book manufacturer. 
In 1939, he received a refugee’s scholarship at 
Columbia University. In 1940, he received a 
bachelor’s degree with honors in library science. That 
same year, he became an assistant to Lyman Bryson in 
the Teachers’ College Readability Lab.  
In 1942, Flesch received a master’s degree in adult 
education. The next year, he received a Ph.D. in 
educational research for his dissertation, “Marks of a 
Readable Style” (1943). This paper set a course for his 
career and that of readability.  
In his dissertation, Flesch published his first 
readability formula for measuring adult reading 
material. One of the variables it used was affixes and 
another was “personal references” such as personal 
pronouns and names. Publishers quickly discovered 
that Flesch’s formula could increase readership by 40 
to 60 percent. Investigators in many fields of 
communication began using it in their studies. 
In 1948, Flesch published a second formula with two parts. The first part, the 
Reading Ease formula, dropped the use of affixes and used only two variables, 
the number of syllables and the number of sentences for each 100-word sample.

The Principles of Readability 
Copyright © 2004 William H. DuBay Page 21 
It predicts reading ease on a scale from 1 to 100, with 30 being “very difficult” 
and 70 being “easy.” Flesch (p. 225) wrote that a score of 100 indicates reading 
matter understood by readers who have completed the fourth grade and are, in 
the language of the U.S. Census barely “functionally literate.”  
The second part of Flesch’s formula predicts human interest by counting the 
number of personal words (such as pronouns and names) and personal sentences 
(such as quotes, exclamations, and incomplete sentences). 
The formula for the updated Flesch Reading Ease score is: 
Score = 206.835 – (1.015 x ASL) – (84.6 x ASW) 
Where: 
Score = position on a scale of 0 (difficult) to 100 (easy), with 30 = very 
difficult and 70 = suitable for adult audiences.  
ASL = average sentence length (the number of words divided by the number 
of sentences). 
ASW = average number of syllables per word (the number of syllables 
divided by the number of words). 
This formula correlates .70 with the 1925 McCall-Crabbs reading tests and .64 
with the 1950 version of the same tests.  
In The Art of Readable Writing, Flesch (1949, p. 149), described his Reading 
Ease scale in this way:   
Reading 
Ease Score 
Style 
Description 
Estimated  Reading 
Grade 
Estimated Percent 
of U.S. Adults 
(1949) 
0 to 30: 
30 to 40: 
50 to 60: 
60 to 70: 
70 to 80: 
80 to 90: 
90 to 100: 
Very Difficult 
Difficult 
Fairly Difficult 
Standard 
Fairly Easy 
Easy 
Very Easy 
College graduate 
13th to 16th grade 
10th to 12th grade 
8th and 9th grade 
7th grade 
6th grade 
5th grade 
4.5 
33 
54 
83 
88 
91 
93 
Table 3. Flesch’s Reading Ease Scores 
Flesch’s Reading Ease formula became the most widely used formula and one of 
the most tested and reliable (Chall 1958, Klare 1963).  
In an attempt to further simplify the Flesch Reading Ease formula, Farr, Jenkins, 
and Paterson (1951) substituted the average number of one-syllable words per 
hundred words for Flesh’s syllable count. The modified formula is: 
New Reading Ease score  = 1.599 nosw – 1.015 sl – 31.517 
Where:  nosw = number of one-syllable words per 100 words; 
 sl = average sentence length in words 
This formula correlates better than .90 with the original Flesch Reading Ease 
formula and .70 with 75% comprehension of 100-word samplings of the McCall-
Crabbs reading lessons. In 1976, a study commissioned by the U.S. Navy 
modified the Reading Ease formula to produce a grade-level score, This popular 
formula is known as the Flesch-Kincaid formula, the Flesch Grade-Scale formula 
or the Kincaid formula (See “The Navy Readability Indexes” below). 
In 1949, Flesch published the results of a 10-year study of the editorial content 
of several magazines. He found that: 
• About 45% of the population can read The Saturday Evening Post.

The Principles of Readability 
Copyright © 2004 William H. DuBay Page 22 
• Nearly 50% of the population can read McCall’s, Ladies Home 
Journal, and Woman’s Home Companion. 
• Slightly over 50% can read American Magazine. 
• 80% of the population can read Modern Screen, Photoplay, and three 
confession magazines. 
Flesch (1949, pp. 149-150) compared the reading scores of popular magazines 
with other variables: 
Style Flesch 
Reading 
Ease 
Score 
Average 
Sentence 
Length in 
Words 
Average 
No. of Syll.  
Per 100 
Words 
Type of 
Magazine 
Estimated 
School 
Grade 
Completed 
Estimated 
Percent of 
U.S. Adults 
Very 
Easy 
90 to 100 8 or less 123 or less Comics 4th grade 93 
Easy 80 to 90 11 131 Pulp 
fiction 
5th grade 91 
Fairly 
Easy 
70 to 80 14 139 Slick 
fiction 
6th grade 88 
Standard 60 to 70 17 147 Digests 7th or 8th 
grades 
83 
Fairly 
Difficult 
50 to 60 21 155 Quality Some high 
school 
54 
Difficult 30 to 50 25 167 Academic High school 
or some 
college 
33 
Very 
Difficult 
0 to 30 29 or 
more 
192 or 
more 
Scientific College 4.5 
Table 4. Flesch’s1949 analysis of the readability of adult reading materials. 
Flesch’s work had an enormous impact on journalism. Like Robert Gunning, 
who worked with the United Press, Flesch was a consultant with the Associated 
Press. Together, they helped to bring down the reading grade level of front-page 
stories from the 16th to the 11th grade, where they remain today. 
 
Fig. 7. Edgar Dale, one of 
the creators of The Living 
Word Vocabulary, 
stressed the importance 
of vocabulary in assessing 
readability. 
The Dale and Chall Original Formula Edgar Dale, for 
25 years a professor of education at Ohio State University, 
was a respected authority on communications. He worked 
his whole life to improve the readability of books, 
pamphlets, and newsletters—the stuff of everyday reading. 
Dale was one of the first critics of the Thorndike lists. He 
claimed it failed to measure the familiarity of words 
accurately. He subsequently developed new lists that were 
later used in readability formulas.  
One of these was a formula he developed with Jeanne 
Chall, the founder and director for 20 years of the Harvard 
Reading Laboratory. She had led the battle for teaching 
early reading systematically with phonics. Her 1967 book 
Learning to Read: The Great Debate, brought research to 
the forefront of the debate. For many years, she also was 
the reading consultant for TV’s Sesame Street and The 
Electric Company.  
The original Dale-Chall formula (1948) was developed for adults and children 
above the 4th grade. They designed it to correct certain shortcomings in the 
Flesch Reading Ease formula. It uses a sentence-length variable plus a

The Principles of Readability 
Copyright © 2004 William H. DuBay Page 23 
percentage of “hard words”–words not found on the Dale-Chall “long list” of 
3,000 easy words, 80 percent of which are known to fourth-grade readers.  
To apply the formula: 
1. Select 100-word samples thro ughout the text (for books, every tenth 
page is recommended). 
2. Compute the average sentence length in words. 
3. Compute the percentage of words outside the Dale list of 3,000 words. 
4. Compute this equation: 
Score = .1579PDW + .0496ASL + 3.6365 
Where:  Raw score = reading grade of a reader who can answer one-half of 
the test questions on a passage. 
PDW= Percentage of Difficult Words (words not on the Dale-Chall 
word list)  
ASL = Average Sentence Length in words.  
The Raw Score needs to be corrected at the higher grades. Dale and Chall 
included with their formula the following chart for correcting the Raw Scores. 
Raw Score Dale-Chall Score 
4.9 and below Grade 4 and below 
5.0 to 5.9 Grades 5-6 
6.0 to 6.9 Grades 7-8 
7.0 to 7.9 Grades 9-10 
8.0 to 8.9 Grades 11-12 
9.0 to 9.9 Grades 13-15 (college) 
10 and above Grades 16 and above (college graduate) 
Table 5. Dale-Call score-correction chart. 
Of all the formulas produced in the early classic period, validations of this 
formula have produced the most consistent, as well as some of the highest 
correlations. It correlated .70 with the multiple-choice test scores on the McCall-
Crabbs reading lessons. You can find a computerized version of this original 
formula online at: 
http://www.interventioncentral.org/htmdocs/tools/okapi/okapi.shtml 
Those interested in manually applying this formula can find the original 1948 
Dale-Chall easy word list online at:  
http://www.interventioncentral.org/htmdocs/tools/okapi/okapimanual/dalechalllist.shtml

The Principles of Readability 
Copyright © 2004 William H. DuBay Page 24 
 
 
Fig. 8. Robert Gunning. 
His  firm was the first 
dedicated to improving 
readability of journalism 
and business writing. 
Robert Gunning and the technique of clear writing  
Robert Gunning was a graduate of Ohio State 
University. In 1935, he entered the field of textbook 
publishing. In the mid-1930s, educators were beginning 
to see high school graduates who were not able to read. 
Gunning realized that much of the reading problem was 
a writing problem. He found that newspapers and 
business were full of “fog” and unnecessary complexity. 
Gunning was among the first to take the new readability 
research into the workplace. In 1944, he founded the 
first consulting firm specializing in readability. During 
the next few years, he tested and worked with more than 
60 large city daily newspapers and the popular 
magazines, helping writers and editors write to their 
audience. 
 
In The Technique of Clear Writing, Gunning (1952) published a readability 
formula developed for adults, the Fog Index, which became popular because of 
its ease of use. It uses two variables, average sentence length and the number of 
words with more than two syllables for each 100 words. 
Grade Level = .4 (average sentence length + hard words) 
Where: 
 Hard words = number of words of more than two syllables 
Gunning developed his formula using a 90% correct-score with the McCall-
Crabbs reading tests. This gives the formula a higher grade criterion than other 
formulas except for McLaughlin’s SMOG formula, which is based on a 100% 
correct-answer criterion. The grade-level scores predicted by these two formulas 
tend to be higher than other formulas.  
Gunning found that popular magazines were consistent in their reading levels 
over time. He published these correlations between reading levels of different 
classes of magazines and their total circulation (p. 35). See Table 6. 
Group Approx. Total 
Circulation 
Average 
Sentence 
Length 
Percentage 
of Hard 
Words 
Total Fog 
Index 
Class Fewer than 1 
million 
20 10 30 12 
News About 3 million 16 10 26 10 
Reader’s 
Digest 
8 million 15 7 22 9 
Slicks More than 10 
million 
15 5 20 8 
Pulps More than 10 
million 
15 3 16 6 
Table 6. Gunning’s analysis of the readability of adult reading materials. 
The validation of the original Fog formula has never been published.  According 
to this author’s calculations, however, it correlates .93 with the normed reading 
texts of Chall et al. (1996), a figure which may account for its popularity.

The Principles of Readability 
Copyright © 2004 William H. DuBay Page 25 
Sumner, and Kearl (1958) recalculated the Fog formula using the McCall-Crabbs 
reading lessons. The recalculated Fog formula, shown here, correlates .59 with 
the reading passages. 
Grade level = 3.0680 + .0877 (average sentence length) + .0984 (percentage 
of monosyllables) 
The publication of the Flesch, Dale-Chall, and Gunning formulas conveniently 
marks the end of the first 30 years of classic readability studies. The authors of 
these formulas brought the issue of readability to public attention. They 
stimulated new consumer demands for documents in plain language. Finally, 
they stimulated new studies, not only on how to improve the formulas, but also 
on the other factors affecting reading success. 
The New Readability Studies 
The new readability was a period of consolidation and deeper study. 
Investigators sought to learn more about how the formulas work and how to 
improve them.  
In the 1950s, several other developments accelerated the study of readability. 
The challenges of Sputnik and the demands of new technologies created a need 
for higher reading skills in all workers. While the older manufacturing industries 
had little demand for advanced readers, new technologies required workers with 
higher reading proficiency.  
The New Readability studies were characterized by these features: 
• A community of scholars. The periodical summaries of the progress of 
readability research  (Klare 1952, 1963, 1974-75, 1984, Chall 1958, 
and Chall and Dale 1995) revealed an exceptionally successful group of 
scholars. They were often neglected by the others in the academe 
because of their work on practical rather than theoretical problems. 
They studied how and why the formulas work, how to improve them, 
and what they tell us not only about reading, but also about writing.  
• The cloze test. The introduction of the cloze test by Wilson Taylor in 
1953 opened the way for investigators to test the properties of texts and 
readers with more accuracy and detail.  
• Reading ability, prior knowledge, interest, and motivation.  A 
number of studies looked at the manner in which these reader variables 
affect readability.  
• Reading efficiency.  While other studies looked at the effects of 
readability on comprehension, these studies looked at the effects on 
reading speed and persistence.   
• The measurement of content. The influence of cognitive psychology 
and linguistics in the 1980s stimulated renewed studies of cognitive and 
structural factors in the text and how they can be used to predict 
readability.  
• Text leveling. Cognitive and linguistic theory revived interest in the 
qualitative and subjective assessment of readability. With training, 
leveling can be effective in assessing the elements of texts not 
addressed by the formulas.   
• Producing and transforming text. Several studies examined the 
effectiveness of using the formula variables to write and revise texts. 
When writers attend to content, organization, and coherence, using the

The Principles of Readability 
Copyright © 2004 William H. DuBay Page 26 
readability variables can be effective in producing and transforming a 
text to a required reading level.  
• New readability formulas. Extensive studies of readability by John 
Bormuth and others looked at the reliability of a wide range of 
measurable text variables. They produced an empirical basis for 
criterion scores and criterion texts for the development of new formulas 
and reworking of old ones. 
• Formula discrepancy  A look a the discrepancy between the results of 
different formulas and how writers can benefit from it. 
A Community of Scholars 
 
Fig. 9. George Klare. After 
serving as a navigator for the
U.S. Air Force in WWII (in 
which he was shot down and 
captured by the Germans), 
Klare became a leading 
figure in readability 
research.  
Two notable features of readability research were a 
community of scholars and a long research base. The 
recognized bibliographer of that effort was George R. 
Klare, now Distinguished Professor Emeritus of 
Psychology and former Dean of the College of Arts and 
Sciences at the Ohio University. Formerly the Dean of the 
Department of Psychology, his field was psychological 
statistics and testing as well as readability measurement.  
Klare not only reviewed readability research (1963, 1974-
75, 1984), but he also directed and participated in 
landmark studies and took the results of research to the 
public. His reviews established the validity of the 
formulas and their proper use not only in English, but also 
in many other languages. Among Klare’s many important 
publications were: 
• Know Your Reader: The Scientific Approach to 
Readability, which he wrote with Byron Buck (1954). 
• The Measurement of Readability (1963). 
•  “Assessing Readability” in the Reading Research Quarterly (1974-75). 
The Institute for Scientific Information recognized it as a Citation 
Classic, one of the scientific works most frequently cited in other 
studies—with well over 125 citations so far. 
• “A Second Look at the Validity of the Readability Formulas” in The 
Journal of Reading Behavior (1976). 
• “Readable Technical Writing: Some Observations” in Technical 
Communication (1977), which won “Best of Show” in the International 
Conference of the STC in Dallas in 1978. 
• A Manual for Readable Writing (1975).  
• How to Write Readable English (1980).  
• “Readability” in Encyclopedia of Educational Research (1982). 
•  “Readability” in TheHandbook of Reading Research (1984). 
• “Readable Computer Documentation” in the ACM Journal of Computer 
Documentation (2000), which covered the latest research in readability. 
Critics of the formulas (e.g., Redish and Selzer 1985) complained that the 
readability formulas were developed for children and they never were never 
formulated or tested with technical documents. The record shows, however, that 
popular formulas such as the Flesch Reading Ease and the Kincaid formulas

The Principles of Readability 
Copyright © 2004 William H. DuBay Page 27 
were developed mainly for adults and have been tested extensively on adults 
with adult materials. For example, Klare (1952) tested the Lorge, Flesch Reading 
Ease, and Dale-Chall formulas against the 16 standardized passages of the 
Ojemann tests (1934) and the 48 passages of Gray and Leary (1935) tests, all 
developed for adult readers. 
As we will see, several extensive studies (Klare et al. 1955a, Klare et al. 1957, 
Klare and Smart 1973, Caylor et al. 1973, Kincaid et al. 1975, Hooke et al. 
1979) used materials developed for technical training and regulations in the 
military to formulate and test several of today’s most popular formulas such as 
the Flesch-Kincaid grade-level formula.  
Perhaps Klare's most important studies were those confirming the effects of prior 
knowledge, reading ability, interest, and motivation on adult reading (See 
below).  
The Cloze Test 
Wilson Taylor (1953) of the University of Illinois published “Cloze Procedure: 
A New Tool for Measuring Readability.” Taylor cited several difficulties with 
the classic readability formulas such as the Flesch and Dale-Chall. He noted, for 
instance, that Gertrude Stein’s works measured much easier on the readability 
scales than expected. 
Taylor argued that words are not the best measure of difficulty but how they 
relate to one another. He proposed using deletion tests called cloze tests for 
measuring an individual’s understanding of a text. Cloze testing is based on the 
theory that readers are better able to fill in the missing words as their reading 
skills improve.  
A cloze test uses a text with regularly deleted words (usually every fifth word) 
and requires the subjects to fill in the blanks. The percentage of words correctly 
entered is the cloze score. The lower the score, the more difficult the text. 
Because even advanced readers cannot correctly complete more than 65% of the 
deleted words correctly in a simple text, texts for assisted reading require a cloze 
score of 35% or more. Texts for unassisted reading need a higher score. Cloze 
scores line up with scores from multiple-choice tests in the following manner: 
Purpose Cloze Multiple-Choice 
Unassisted 
reading 
50-60% 70-80% 
Instructional, 
assisted reading 
35-50% 50-60% 
Frustration level Below 35% Below 50% 
Table 7.  Comparison of cloze and multiple-choice scores.  
For the origins of these scores, see “The Problem of Optimal Difficulty” below. 
A cloze test uses a text with selected words deleted and replaced with underlines 
of the same length. Having at least 50 blanks in the reading selection increases 
the reliability of the test.  
To score a cloze test, use the percentage of all the words that are correctly 
entered, that is, the right words in the right form (no synonyms), number, person, 
tense, voice, and mode. Do not count spelling.  
It greatly increases the accuracy of the test to test all the words by using different 
versions of the text. If you delete every 5th word, there are five possible versions, 
each one with a different first deleted word. Divide the subjects into as many 
groups as you have versions and give each group a different version.

The Principles of Readability 
Copyright © 2004 William H. DuBay Page 28 
Here is a sample cloze test: 
The potential for two-way _______ is very strong on ________ Web. As a 
result, ________ companies are focused on ________ Web’s marketing 
potential. From ________ marketing point of view, ________ virtual worlds 
can attract ________curious Web explorers, and ________database engines 
can measure ________ track a visitor’s every ________. 
See the answers at the end of this article. Note that the standard cloze test does 
not provide a list of the correct words to choose from as some online cloze 
programs do.  
Cloze testing became the object of intensive research, with over a thousand 
studies published (Klare 1982). It quickly became popular as a research tool, and 
tended to complement not the formulas as expected but conventional reading 
tests. Unlike multiple-choice tests, cloze tests can provide suggestive information 
about individual sentences, clauses, phrases, and words. Cloze tests are suitable 
for intermediate and advanced readers. Cloze testing opened the way for much 
more intensive studies of the readability formulas, beginning with Bormuth in 
1966 (see below).  
Reading Ability, Prior Knowledge, Interest, and Motivation 
The interest factors affecting the readability of children’s literature was taken up 
by Gates (1930) and Zeller (1941). One of the interest factors that Gates 
mentioned for children was reading ease. Flesch’s early formula for adults 
(1949) included interest factors for measuring readability. The new research 
would establish that, along with vocabulary and sentence structure, the reader’s 
reading ability, prior knowledge and motivation are powerful contributors to text 
readability. 
Prior knowledge and retention   A series of studies in the military (Klare et al. 
1955a) examined how prior knowledge as well as the text variables affect the 
retention and the acceptability of technical documents. 
The studies were conducted at Sampson Air Force Base in New York and 
Chanute Air Force Base in Illinois using 989 male Air Force enlistees in training 
with different versions of the same texts. They used the Flesch Reading Ease, 
Dale-Chall, and the Flesch Level-of-Abstraction formulas to rate the texts as 
Easy (grade 7), Present (12th grade), and Hard (16th grade).  
While simplifying documents and changing the style, they retained all technical 
terms and used technical experts to assure that they did not change the content. 
This study found the more readable versions resulted in: 
• Greater and more complete retention. 
• Greater amount read in a given time. 
• Greater acceptability (preference).  
The study found that, “…while style difficulty appears to affect immediate 
retention of subjects who are naïve regarding material, subjects who have 
considerable knowledge of the material may profit little if any from an easier 
style of material” (p. 294).  
Duffy (1985) criticizes the results of this study.  He states that the 8% percent 
improvement in comprehension, achieved by dropping the reading level of the 
texts eight grades (from the 16th+ grade to the 7th-8th grades—1% improvement 
for each grade dropped) is not large enough to justify the effort required.  
Duffy underestimates the difficulty of demonstrating the comprehension gained 
by changing any textual variable while carefully controlling the other variables

The Principles of Readability 
Copyright © 2004 William H. DuBay Page 29 
done in the study. Most researchers are very happy to get any non-chance 
improvements in comprehension, the holy grail of reading research.  
The difficulty arises from the complexity of reading comprehension and the 
means we have of testing it, which are all indirect. Researchers, for example, are 
not sure exactly what the results of reading tests are telling them. Do they reveal 
comprehension of the text or other artifacts such as prior knowledge, memory, or 
the difficulty of the questions? 
Studies of the effects of textual variables and writing strategies on 
comprehension are very often inconsistent, inconclusive, or non-existent. 
Examples include: the use of illustrations (Halbert 1944, Vernon 1946, Omaggio 
1979; Felker et al., 1981), schemas (Rumelhart 1984), structural cues 
(Spyridakis, 1989, 1989a), highlighting (Klare et al. 1955b, Felker et al.), 
paragraph length (Markel, et al., 1992), typographic format (Klare 1957), syntax 
simplification (Ulijn and Strother 1990), prior knowledge (Richards 1984), 
nominalizations, diagrams, parallelism, white space, line graphs, and justified 
margins (Felker et al,), “whiz deletions” (Huckin et al. 1991), writer guidelines 
(McLean 1985), and coherence and cohesion (Freebody and Anderson 1983, 
Halliday and Hasan 1976).  
No one would say that any of these items are not helpful or do not affect 
comprehension. These studies show, however, how difficult it is to detect and 
measure the effect of a reading variable on comprehension. Any significant gain 
in comprehension, even a small one, can be important over time and suggests 
further study. In this regard, studies confirm that the formulas do very well. See 
“Producing and transforming texts” below.  
Career preferences, aptitudes, and test scores.  A further investigation by the 
same authors (Klare et al. 1955c) looked into the effect of career aptitude and 
preferences on immediate retention. As expected, the subjects with higher degree 
of mechanical and clerical aptitude showed consistently higher retention on test 
scores. There were no significant relationships, however, between career 
preferences and retention.    
Interest, Prior Knowledge, Readability and Comprehension  A study (Klare 
1976) of the experiments on the effects of using formulas to revise texts showed 
how different levels of motivation and reading ability can skew the results. It 
also indicated that the readability of a text is more important when interest is low 
than when it is high. The study by Fass and Schumacher (1978) supports this 
claim.  
Woern (1977) later showed that prior knowledge and beliefs about the world 
affected comprehension significantly. Pearson, Hanson, and Gordon (1979) 
discovered significant effects of prior knowledge on the comprehension of 
children reading about spiders. Spilich, Vesonder, Chiesi, and Voss (1979) 
found that subjects having more knowledge about baseball remembered more 
information about a baseball episode. Chiesi, Spilich, and Voss (1979) found 
that high-knowledge subjects had better recognition, recall, and anticipation of 
goal outcomes than did low-knowledge subjects.  
Entin and Klare (1985) took up the interaction between the readability of the text 
and the prior knowledge and interest of the readers. The study used 66 students 
enrolled in introductory psychology courses at Ohio University. They were first 
tested with the Nelson-Denny Reading Test to determine reading skills. They 
were then given a questionnaire on their interest in selected topics and a 
questionnaire on their prior knowledge of the terminology used in the test 
passages. For test passages, they used 12 selected passages from the World Book 
Encyclopedia, six high-interest passages, and six low-interest ones. The passages

The Principles of Readability 
Copyright © 2004 William H. DuBay Page 30 
were re-written and normed by judges for content at the 12th and 16th-grade 
levels, resulting in 24 passages for the experiment. Then, two cloze tests were 
made of each passage, resulting in 48 test passages 
This study confirmed that easier readability of a text has more benefits for those 
of less knowledge and interest than those of more. Advanced knowledge of a 
subject can “drown out” the effects of an otherwise difficult text.  
This study also suggested that when reader interest is high, comprehension is not 
improved by writing the material below, rather than at, the grade level of the 
readers. When interest is low, however, comprehension is improved by writing 
the materials below, rather than at, the reading level of the readers. 
Comprehension was improved when the materials are written at the reading 
levels of all readers rather than above those levels.  
Reading Performance  
While early studies used reader comprehension as a measure of readability, new 
studies were looking at other performance measures such as: 
• Readership 
• Reading persistence (or perseverance) 
• Reading efficiency 
Readability and reader persistence  Several studies in the field of journalism 
found a significant relationship between reader persistence and readability. Some 
used split runs of newspapers to see the effects of improved readability on wide 
audiences.  
Donald Murphy (1947), the editor of Wallace’s Farmer, used a split run with an 
article written at the 9th-grade level on one run and on at the 6th-grade level on 
the other run. He found that increasing readability increased  readership up of the 
article 18 percent. In a second test, he took great care not to change anything 
except readability, keeping headlines, illustrations, subject matter and the 
position the same. He found readership increases of 45% for an article on nylon 
and 60% for an article on corn.  
Wilbur Schramm (1947) showed that a readable style contributes to the readers’ 
perseverance, also called depth or persistence, the tendency to keep reading the 
text.   
Charles E. Swanson (1948) showed that better readability increases reading 
perseverance as much as 80 percent. He developed an easy version of a story 
with 131 syllables per 100 words and a hard version with 173 syllables and 
distributed each to 125 families. A survey of readers taken 30 hours after 
distribution showed a gain in the easier version over the hard version of 93% of 
total paragraphs read, 83% in mean number of paragraphs read, and 82% in the 
number of correspondents reading every paragraph.  
Bernard Feld (1948) grouped 101 stories from the Birmingham News into those 
with high Flesch scores, requiring 9th-grade education or more and those with 
low scores, requiring less than 9th-grade education. He found readership 
differences of 20 to 75 percent favoring the low-score versions. Feld’s findings 
indicated that even a small actual percentage gain for a large-circulation paper 
greatly increased the number of readers.  
Reading efficiency Klare, Shuford, and Nichols (1957) followed up these 
studies with a study of the reading efficiency and retention of 120 male aviators 
in a mechanics course at Chanute Air Force Base in Illinois. They used two 
versions of technical training materials, hard (13th-15th grade) and easy (7th-8th 
grade).

The Principles of Readability 
Copyright © 2004 William H. DuBay Page 31 
They measured reading efficiency with an eye-movement camera with which 
they could determine the number of words read per second and the number of 
words read per fixation. A strong “set-to-learn” was stimulated by allowing the 
subjects to re-read the text and giving them a pre-test before the experimental 
test. 
The study showed that the easy text significantly improved both reading 
efficiency and retention. The results also indicated that a strong “set to learn” 
improved scores. 
Hardyck and Petrinovich (1970) showed the connection between readability and 
both comprehension and muscle activity in the oral area (subvocalization).   
Rothkopf (1977) showed the connection between readability and how many 
words a typist continues to type after the copy page is covered (functional 
chaining). 
Readability and course completion  Publishers of correspondence courses are 
understandably concerned when large numbers of students do not complete the 
courses. They often suspect the materials are too difficult for the students. 
Working with Kim Smart of the U. S. Armed Forces Institute, Klare (1973) 
applied the Flesch Reading Ease formula to thirty sets of printed correspondence 
courses used by the military. 
They found that two of the high school courses and five of the college courses 
were too difficult for readers of average or below average reading skill. 
They then compared their reading analysis to the completion records of the 17 
courses that had been in use over two years. They found a Spearman rank-order 
correlation of .87 between the readability score and the probability of students 
completing the course. There was a Pearson product-moment correlation of .76.  
These results showed the importance of readability for unassisted reading where 
pressure to complete a course of study is low and competition from distractions 
is high. 
The Measurement of Content 
For hundreds of years, writers and teachers have used and taught the cognitive 
and structural factors in text such as organization and coherence. Researchers in 
readability also addressed the effects of these factors on comprehension: 
• Image words, abstraction, predication, direct and indirect discourse, 
types of narration, and types of sentences, phrases, and clauses (Gray 
and Leary 1935). 
• Difficult concepts (Morriss and Holverson 1938, Chall 1958). 
• Idea density (Dolch 1939). 
• Human interest (Flesch 1949, Gunning 1952) 
• Organization (Gunning 1952, Klare and Buck 1954, Chall 1958).  
• Nominalization (Coleman and Blumenfeld 1963; Coleman, 1964) 
• Active and passive voice (Gough 1965, Coleman 1966, Clark and 
Haviland 1977, Hornby 1974). 
• Embeddedness (Coleman 1966). 
The cognitive theorists and linguists, beginning in the 1970s, promoted the idea 
that reading was largely an act of thinking. Among the ideas they promoted 
were: 
1. Meaning is not in the words on the page. The reader constructs 
meaning by making inferences and interpretations.

The Principles of Readability 
Copyright © 2004 William H. DuBay Page 32 
2. Information is stored in long-term memory in organized "knowledge 
structures." The essence of learning is linking new information to prior 
knowledge about the topic, the text structure or genre, and strategies 
for learning.  
3. A reader constructs meaning using metacognition, the ability to think 
about and control the learning process (i.e., to plan, monitor 
comprehension, and revise the use of strategies and comprehension); 
and attribution, beliefs about the relationship among performance, 
effort, and responsibility (Knuth and Jones 1991). 
The cognitive theorists, aware of the limitations of the readability formulas, set 
about to supplement them with ways to measure the content, organization, and 
coherence of the text. Their studies reinforced the importance of these variables 
for comprehension. They did not, however, come up with any practical method 
for measuring or adjusting them for different levels of readers. 
The following sections summarize a few of these efforts.  
Walter Kintsch and coherence  Beginning in 1977, Walter Kintsch and his 
associates studied the cognitive and structural issues of readability. Kintsch 
proposed to measure readability by measuring the number of propositions in a 
text. A proposition consists of a predicate and one or more arguments. An 
argument can be a concept or another argument. A concept is the abstract idea 
conveyed by a word or phrase. 
In the early part of his work, Kintsch (Kintsch and Vipond 1979) was quite 
critical of the readability formulas. He said they are not based on modern 
linguistic theory and they overlook the interaction between the reader and the 
text.  
Over four years, however, he and his associates revised this position. He 
eventually admitted that “these formulas are correlated with the conceptual 
properties of text” and that vocabulary and sentence length are the strongest 
predictors of difficulty (Kintsch and Miller 1981, p. 222). 
While Kintsch and his colleagues did not come up with any easily used formula, 
they did contributed to our understanding of readability, including the central 
role of coherence in a text. Kintsch found out that lack of coherence affects 
lower-grade readers much more than upper-grade ones. The upper-grade readers, 
in fact, feel challenged to reorganize the text themselves. They may require more 
opportunities for solving problems, while lower-grade readers require more 
carefully organized texts. 
The Air Force transformational formula. Perhaps the most ambitious attempt 
to quantify the variables of the cognitive theorists and put them in a formula was 
the project of Williams, Siegel, Burkett, and Groff (1977). Working for the Air 
Force Human Resources Laboratory, they examined new variables, produced a 
new formula, and presented supporting data. The variables they included were:  
• Four psycholinguistic variables such as Yngve word depths, 
transformational complexity, center embedding, and right branching.  
• Four Structure of Intellect variables including cognition of semantic 
units, memory for semantic units, evaluation of symbolic implications, 
and divergent production of semantic units. 
For a criterion, they used cloze scores on 14 passages of about 600 words each 
taken from the Air Force career-development course. They deleted each tenth 
word in the cloze test and used only one version out of a possible ten on 51 Air-
Force subjects. The computerized formula produced a correlation of 0.601 with 
text difficulty.

The Principles of Readability 
Copyright © 2004 William H. DuBay Page 33 
Susan Kemper and the reader’s mental load  Following Kintsch, Susan 
Kemper (1983) sought to explain comprehension in terms of underling cognitive 
processes. She developed a formula designed to measure the “inference load” 
based on three kinds of causal links:  
• Physical states 
• Stated mental states 
• Inferred mental states 
The Kemper formula measures the density of the propositions and embedded 
clauses. It takes considerable time and effort in comparison to the readability 
formulas. It has a correlation of .63 with the McCall-Crabbs tests (the original 
Dale-Chall formula has a correlation of .64).  
Kemper (p. 399) commented: “..sentence length and word familiarity do 
contribute to the comprehension of these passages…. These two different 
approaches to measuring the grade level difficulty of texts are equivalent in 
predictive power.” 
Kemper admitted that her formula, like all readability formulas, is better at 
predicting problems than fixing them. For writing, both formulas are best used as 
a general guide. 
Bonnie Meyer and organization  Bonnie Meyer and others worked on using 
the organization of larger units of texts as a possible measurement of readability. 
She claimed that a text that follows a topical plan is more efficient (saves effort) 
and more effective (gets more results). She wrote: 
That is, people remember more and read faster information which is 
logically organized with a topical plan than they do when the same 
information is presented in a disorganized, random fashion…. Thus 
the plan of discourse can be considered apart from content, and 
deserves separate consideration from researchers, as from those who 
are planning a composition (Meyer 1982, p. 38). 
Among Meyer’s observations are the following: 
• A visible plan for presenting content plays a key role in assessing the 
difficulty of a text. 
• A plan incorporates a hierarchy showing the dependencies of the facts 
to one another: 
• The antecedent/consequent plan shows causal relationships in 
“if/then” logic. 
• The comparison plan presents two opposing views that give weight to 
both sides. 
• The adversative plan clearly favors one side over the other (political 
speeches). 
• The description plan describes the component parts of an item 
(newspaper articles). This plan is the least effective for remembering 
and recall. 
• The response plan gives answers to remarks, questions, and problems 
(science articles). 
• The time-order plan relates events chronologically (history texts). 
Better readers tend to share the same plan as authors of the material they are 
reading. Readers who use a different plan other than the authors may be at a 
disadvantage.

The Principles of Readability 
Copyright © 2004 William H. DuBay Page 34 
There are two types of highlighting for showing the relationships between items: 
• Subordination, used to connect the main idea with supporting text as 
in a hierarchical structure. 
• Signaling, explicit markers to clarify relationships such as: 
“On the one hand…On the other hand…” 
“Three things have to be stressed here.” 
“Thus,” “consequently,” and “therefore” 
“Nevertheless,” “all the same,” “although,” “but,” and “however” 
Signaling can also clarify how larger blocks of content are related, for example: 
“For example,” “For further details,” “summary,” “abstract,” “conclusion,” and 
“preview.” For more on signaling, see the studies by Jan Spyridakis (1989, 
1989a).  
Besides reducing the difficulty of the text, Meyer wrote that strategy training can 
also help older adults deal with the difficulties they encounter in reading. 
Bonnie Armbruster and textual coherence  Also concerned with larger units 
of text, Bonnie Armbruster (1984) found that the most important feature for 
learning and comprehension is textual coherence, which comes in two types: 
• Global coherence, which integrates high-level ideas across an entire 
section, chapter, or book. 
• Local coherence, which uses connectives to link ideas within and 
between sentences. 
Armbruster found that recalling stories from memory is superior when the 
structure of the story is clear. She also noted the close relationship between 
global content and organization. Content is an aspect of structure, and 
organization is the supreme source of comprehension difficulty. 
For local coherence, Armbruster stressed the highlighting that carries meanings 
from one phrase, clause, or sentence to another: 
• Pronoun references to previous nouns 
• Substitutions or replacements for a previously used phrase or clause 
(sometimes called “resumptive modifiers”), for example: “These results 
[previously listed] suggest that…” 
• Conjunctions 
• Connectives 
Finally, Armbruster supported Kintsch’s finding that coherence and structure are 
more important for younger readers than older ones, simply because they have 
less language and experience.  
Calfee, Curley, and the familiar outline  R.C. Calfee and R. Curley (1984) 
built on the work of Bonnie Meyer. They stressed making the structure of the 
text clear to upper-grade readers. The content can be simple, but an unfamiliar 
underlying structure can make the text unnecessarily difficult. 
They proposed that the teacher, researcher, and student all need to reach a 
mutual understanding of the type of outline being used for the text under 
discussion.  
Most students are familiar with the narrative structure, but not with other forms. 
Calfee and Curley present a graduated curriculum that enables students to 
progress from simpler structures to ones that are more difficult: 
1. Narrative—fictional and factual

The Principles of Readability 
Copyright © 2004 William H. DuBay Page 35 
2. Concrete process—descriptive and prescriptive 
3. Description—fictional, factual particular, and factual general 
4. Concrete topical exposition 
5. Line of reasoning—rational, narrative, physical and relational cause-
and-effect 
6. Argument—dialogue, theories and support, reflective essay 
7. Abstract exposition 
The lessons of content, organization, and coherence  Organization and 
coherence highlight the relationships between words, sentences, paragraphs, and 
larger sections of text. They enable readers to fit new items of information into 
their own cognitive systems of organization.  
The cognitive studies of readability also showed other problems that texts can 
reveal or create, such as: 
• Unfamiliar life experiences and background 
• The need for time to digest illustrations and new material 
• The need for multiple treatments of difficult material 
• The need for learning aids to overcome textual difficulty 
• The need for learning aids to help readers of different levels of skill.  
Generally, however, the cognitive researchers failed to translate their theories 
into practical and objective methods for adjusting the difficulty of texts for 
different levels of reading skill.  
Critics of the formulas (e.g., Manzo 1970, Bruce et al. 1981, Selzer 1981, 
Redish and Selzer 1985, Schriver 2000) rightly claim that the formulas use only 
“surface features” of text and ignore other features like content and organization. 
The research shows, however, that these surface features—the readability 
variables—with all their limitations have remained the best predictors of text 
difficulty as measured by comprehension tests (Hunt 1965, Bormuth 1966, 
Maxwell 1978, Coupland 1978, Kintsch and Miller 1981, Chall 1984, Klare 
1984, Davison 1984 and 1986, Carver 1990, Chall and Conard 1991, Chall and 
Dale 1995).  
Text Leveling   
An important byproduct of the cognitive and linguistic emphasis was the 
renewed interest in text leveling. This involves a subjective analysis of reading 
level that examines vocabulary, format, content, length, illustrations, repetition 
of words, and curriculum. Text leveling is perhaps the oldest method of grading 
a text. The McGuffey readers were graded by leveling, and their success is an 
indication of its validity.  
Leveling recently became popular largely due to the work of the New Zealand 
Department of Education. In the U.S., Marie Clay’s (1991) Reading Recovery 
system uses leveling in tutoring of children with reading problems. In this 
system, teachers use leveling to find books with closely spaced difficulty levels, 
particularly at the first-and second-grade levels. Most traditional readability 
formulas are not particularly sensitive at those levels (Fountas and Pinnell, 
1999). 
For that same reason, readability experts have long encouraged the use of 
subjective leveling along with the readability formulas. Leveling can spot the 
items that the formulas do not measure (Klare 1963, pp. 137-144; Chall et al. 
1996; Fry 2002).

The Principles of Readability 
Copyright © 2004 William H. DuBay Page 36 
R. P. Carver (1975-1976) introduced a method of using qualified raters to 
assess the difficulty of texts. Raters become qualified when accurately judging 
the difficulty of  five passages using his “Rauding Scale,” consisting of six 
passages representing grades 2, 5, 8, 11, 14, and 17. Carver claimed his method 
was slightly more accurate than the Dale and Chall and Flesch Reading Ease 
formulas and provides grade-level scores through grade 18. 
H. Singer (1975) created a method called SEER, “Singer Eyeball Estimate of 
Readability.” It involves the use of one or two accurate SEER judges matching a 
sample of text against one of two scales, each consisting of eight rated passages. 
Singer claims his method is as accurate as the Fry graph. 
The problem, of course, is that it takes some effort to learn how to do leveling 
accurately. Advanced readers often fail to recognize how difficult texts can be 
for others. Leveling also becomes more effective and accurate as the number of 
experienced judges increases (Klare, 1984).  
Jeanne Chall and her associates (1996) published Qualitative Assessment of Text 
Difficulty, A Practical Guide for Teachers and Writers. It uses graded passages, 
called “scales,” from published works along with layouts and illustrations for 
leveling of texts. You can assess the readability of your own documents by 
comparing them to these passages and using the worksheet in the book. The 52 
passages are arranged by grade level and by the following types of text: 
• Literature 
• Popular fiction 
• Life sciences 
• Physical sciences 
• Narrative social studies 
• Expository social studies 
The scale passages were selected on the basis of the following grade-related 
requirements for the reader: 
1.  Knowledge of vocabulary 
2.  Familiarity with sentence structure 
3.  Subject-related and cultural knowledge 
4.  Technical knowledge 
5.  Density of ideas 
6.  Level of reasoning 
The selections were then tested by: 
1. Evaluation by several groups of teachers and administrators 
2.  Evaluation by students of corresponding grades 
3. Cloze testing of students of corresponding grades 
4. Readability formulas (Dale-Chall and Spache) 
The book also describes at length the various characteristics of each type of text 
that can contribute to difficulty. An added section features samples of the design 
and illustrations of books appropriate for the first four grades. 
The following are three samples of the scales taken from the book.

The Principles of Readability 
Copyright © 2004 William H. DuBay Page 37 
Reading Level 3 
The stars, like the sun, are always in the sky, and they are always 
shining. In the daytime the sky is so bright that the stars do not show. 
But when the sky darkens, there they are. 
What are the stars, you wonder, and how do they twinkle? 
Stars are huge balls of hot, hot gas. They are like the sun but they look 
small because they are much, much farther away. They are trillions and 
trillions of miles away, shining in black space, high above the air.  
Space is empty and does not move. Stars do not twinkle there, but 
twinkling begins when starlight hits the air. The air moves and tosses 
the light around. 
—From The Starry Sky: An Outdoor Science Book (Wyler 1989, pp. 15-
16) 
Reading Level 5-6 
Black holes are probably the weirdest objects in space. They are 
created during a supernova explosion. If the collapsing core of the 
exploding star is large enough—more than four times the mass of our 
sun—it does not stop compressing when it gets as small as a neutron 
star. The matter crushes itself out of existence. All that remains is the 
gravity field—a black hole. The object is gone. Anything that comes 
close to it is swallowed up. Even a beam of light cannot escape. 
Like vacuum cleaners in space, black holes suck up everything around 
them. But their reach is short. A black hole would have to be closer 
than one light-year to have even a small effect on the orbits of the 
planets in our solar system. A catastrophe such as the swallowing of 
the Earth or the sun is strictly science fiction.  
—From Exploring the Sky (Dickinson 1987, p. 42) 
Reading Level 7-8 
As we have seen, a neutron star would be small and dense. It should 
also be rotating rapidly. All stars rotate, but most of them do so 
leisurely. For example, our Sun takes nearly one month to rotate 
around its axis. A collapsing star speeds up as its size shrinks, just as 
an ice-skater during a pirouette speeds up when she pulls in her arms. 
This phenomenon is a direct consequence of a law of physics known as 
the conservation of angular momentum, which holds that the total 
amount of angular momentum in a system holds constant. An ordinary 
star rotating once a month would be spinning faster than once a second 
if compressed to the size of a neutron star. 
In addition to having rapid rotation, we expect a neutron star to have an 
intense magnetic field. It is probably safe to say that every star has a 
magnetic field of some strength. 
 —From Discovering the Universe (Faufmann 1990, p. 290) 
Producing and Transforming Text  
While the formulas were originally created to help educators select texts for 
different audiences, writers also use the formula variables to produce texts and 
transform (re-write) them into simpler versions. The evidence on how effective 
this is has been mixed. As both the supporters of the formulas and their critics 
have warned, if you just chop up sentences and use shorter words, the results are 
not likely to improve comprehension. You have to look at the many other factors 
that affect reading at the level for which you are writing. 
Early evidence on the effects of using the formula variables to transform text was 
negative. Klare (1963) reported that, of the six readability studies involving the 
controlled manipulation of words or sentences, only one had a positive effect, 
and this involved simplifying vocabulary.

The Principles of Readability 
Copyright © 2004 William H. DuBay Page 38 
In a later study, Klare (1976) took a careful look at 36 studies that examined the 
effects on comprehension of using the readability formula variables in re-writing 
texts. He grouped them by their results: 
• 19 studies had positive results (readability variables had a significant 
effect on comprehension and/or retention)  
• 6 studies had mixed results  
• 11 studies had negative results (no measurable effect). 
In seeking the reasons for the differences, Klare looked carefully at 28 
situational factors in which each experiment was conducted. The situational 
factors fell into these groups: 
• The readability and content of the material. 
• The competence and motivation of the subjects. 
• The instructions given the subjects during the experiment. 
• The details of the test situation. 
Klare found that differences in readability were often overridden by other factors 
in the test situation such as: 
• The instruction given to the subjects of the test. 
• The presence of threats or rewards. 
• The time allowed for reading and testing. 
• The presence or absence of the text during the test. 
Klare wrote that the performance of the subject in such tests is a function not 
only of the difficulty of the material, but also in critical degrees, a function of the 
test situation (time, place, etc.), the content of the material and the competence 
and motivation of the reader. Scores will be better, for instance, when the readers 
love the subject matter or if they are highly motivated (e.g., paid).  
Klare concluded that in the studies that showed increased comprehension, 
transforming text requires attending to other problems besides word and 
sentence length. “The best assumption, it seems to me,” he wrote, “is that the 
research workers, probably with considerable effort, managed to change basic 
underlying causes of difficulty in producing readable versions” (p. 148). Klare 
then listed the following word-and-sentence variables that affected 
comprehension: 
Word characteristics: 
1. Proportion of content (functional) words. 
2. Frequency, familiarity, and length of content words. 
3. Concreteness or abstractness. 
4. Association value. 
5. Active vs. nominalized verb constructions. 
Sentence characteristics: 
1. Length (esp. clause length). 
2. Active vs. passive. 
3. Affirmative vs. negative. 
4. Embedded vs. non-embedded. 
5. Low depth vs. high depth (branches).

The Principles of Readability 
Copyright © 2004 William H. DuBay Page 39 
Since Klare’s 1976 study, there have been other studies showing the positive 
effects of using formula variables to improve comprehension (Ewing 1976, 
Green 1979, C. C. Swanson 1979).  
In the many studies of before-and-after revision of the text, a negative result does 
not prove that there is no improvement in comprehension. They show instead 
that improvement has not been detected. There is a saying in statistics that you 
cannot prove a negative. 
Studies reporting a negative result may result from failing to control the reading 
ability, prior knowledge, interest, and motivation of the subjects. They can also 
result from failing to control elements of the text such as organization, 
coherence, and design. The great difficulty of properly conducting such an 
experiment is seen in following two studies. 
The Duffy and Kabance study  Critics worry that technical communicators can 
too easily misuse the formulas, making documents more difficult, not less 
(Charrow 1977, Kern, 1979, Selzer 1981, Lange 1982, Duffy 1985, Redish and 
Selzer 1985, Connaster 1999, Redish 2000, Schriver 2000). These writers offer 
little or no evidence of such misuse, however, widespread or otherwise. If 
unscrupulous or careless writers choose to cheat by “writing to the formula” and 
not attending to other textual issues, careful editors and reviewers easily spot the 
misuse. The study by Thomas Duffy and Paula Kabance (1981) is a case in 
point. Because formula critics (e.g., Redish and Selzer 1985; Redish 2000) often 
refer to this study, it deserves some attention. 
The Duffy and Kabance study consisted of four experiments that examined the 
effects of changing only word and sentence length on comprehension. It used a 
“reading to do” task and a “reading to learn” task. The study used four versions 
of the text:  
1. The original version (a  narrative or expository passage from the 1973 
Nelson-Denny reading tests). 
2. One with vocabulary that they simplified using The Living Word 
Vocabulary 
3. One with only simplified and shortened sentences. 
4. One with both vocabulary and sentences simplified.  
The effect was a 6-grade drop in reading level of the changed passages from the 
11th to the 5th grade.  
Following Klare’s research protocols (1976), they attempted to maximize the 
readability effects by using readers who were low motivated, unfamiliar with the 
topic, and widely varying in reading skills.  
Using the Nelson-Denny reading tests, they tested the reading ability of the 
1,169 subjects, male Navy trainees between 17 and 20 years old, of which 80% 
were high-school graduates. They divided them into two groups, one with a 
median reading grade of 8.7 and the other 10.3. The experiments took place in 
groups of 40 to 70.  
In the first two experiments, they simulated a “reading-to-do” situation. In the 
first experiment, they first showed the questions, then had the subjects read the 
text. After that, they were shown the questions again, which they answered. In 
the second experiment, they limited the reading time but let the subjects have 
access to the text while answering the questions. The third experiment was a 
standard cloze test. The fourth experiment was a standard multiple-choice test 
with the subjects first reading the text and then answering the questions without 
the text.

The Principles of Readability 
Copyright © 2004 William H. DuBay Page 40 
The first three experiments showed no significant improvements. The fourth 
experiment resulted in significant improvement but only with the low-ability 
group using the changed-vocabulary text, an improvement of 13 percent. The 
authors concluded that simplifying the text made no difference to the advanced 
readers. This is not a surprising result, when we consider the reading ability of 
the advance group was at grade 10.3 while the difficult text was at 11th grade. 
The vocabulary variable is significant for the low-ability group, they stated, but 
only in reading-to-learn tasks but not reading-to-do tasks, where memory is less 
important. This correlation was also suggested by Fass and Schumacher (1978).  
Duffy and Kabance concluded that the increased readability is not required for 
technical documents, in which the emphasis is on “reading to do” and memory is 
not required.  
This is sometimes true. At other times, serious errors have taken place because 
of memory failure. Many, if not most, technical tasks involve learning a skill that 
can be repeated, as Redish (1988) emphasizes. Besides reading-to-learn and 
reading-to-do tasks, she writes, many technical tasks require “reading to learn to 
do.” Technical texts may require more memory than do most other kinds of 
literature such as magazines, newspapers, or fiction.  
When we look at the methods of these experiments, difficulties appear that 
explain their inconsistent results. In their report, Duffy and Kabance provide four 
sample passages used in the study. The re-written passages appear disjointed and 
stilted, not what one would expect of a 5th-grade text (See Fig. 11). If these 
studies are representative of the other passages, we must assume that judges were 
not used to control for the coherence and content of the text.  
This was the also the conclusion of Leslie Olsen and Rod Johnson (1989), who 
wrote: “In their study, Duffy and Kabance were trying to directly manipulate the 
understanding of the words and the syntax of the sentences. However, it seemed 
to us that they were also unintentionally altering other aspects of the text—in 
particular, the cohesive structures of the text.”  
In their paper, Olsen and Johnson defined “sensed cohesion” as the strength of 
the textual topicality and the sense of givenness. The strength of textual 
topicality is related to the persistence of what the text is about. The sense of 
givenness is the recognition that the reader has seen a particular noun phrase 
before.  
In analyzing the passages of the Duffy and Kabance study, Olsen and Johnson 
found that long sentences were broken up into short sentences. In the process, 
they introduced new subjects. The original focus on the Spaniards was lost, 
making it difficult to know what the text is about. They analyzed the 
cohesiveness of the text and concluded, “the intended and the unintended effects 
of the revisions cancelled one another out,” bringing the results of the study into 
question.

The Principles of Readability 
Copyright © 2004 William H. DuBay Page 41 
 
Original (11th Grade) 
   The night was cloudy, and a drizzling rain, which fell 
without intermission, added to the obscurity. Steadily, 
and as noiselessly as possible, the Spaniards made their 
way along the main street, which had so lately 
resounded to the tumult of battle. All was now hushed 
in silence; they were only reminded of the past by the 
occasional presence of some solitary corpse, or a dark 
heap of the slain, which too plainly told where the strife 
had been the hottest. As they passed along the lanes and 
alleys which opened into the great street, they easily 
fancied they discerned the shadowy forms of their foe 
lurking in ambush, ready to spring upon them. But it 
was only fancy; they city slept undisturbed even by the 
prolonged echoes of the tramp of the horses, and the 
hoarse rumbling of the artillery and baggage trains. At 
length, a lighter space beyond the dusky line of 
buildings showed the van of the army that it was 
emerging on an open causeway. They might well have 
congratulated themselves on having thus escaped the 
dangers of an assault in the city itself, and that a brief 
time would place them in comparative safety on the 
opposite shore.  
Sentences and Vocabulary Revised (5th Grade) 
   The night was cloudy. A sprinkling rain added to the 
darkness. It fell without a break. The Spaniards made 
their way along the main street. They moved without 
stopping and with as little noise as possible. The street 
had so recently roared to the noise of battle. All was now 
hushed in silence. The presence of a single dead body 
reminded them of the past. A dark heap of the slain also 
reminded them. Clearly, the battle had been worse there. 
They passed along the lanes and alleys opening into the 
great street. They easily fancied the shadows of their 
enemy lying in wait. The enemy looked ready to spring 
upon them. But it was only fancy. The city slept without 
being bothered by the rough rumbling of the cannons 
and baggage trains. Even the constant sound of the tramp 
of horses did not bother the city. At length, there was a 
bright space beyond the dark line of the buildings. This 
informed the army look-out of their coming out onto the 
open highway. They might well have rejoiced. They had 
thus escaped the dangers of an attack in the city itself. A 
brief time would place them in greater safety on the 
opposite shore. 
Fig. 10. Original and revised samples of the passages used in the Duffy and Kabance study of 1981. Lack of 
attention to coherence and other important variables can cancel out the effects of rewriting the text using the 
readability-formula variables.  
The Charrow and Charrow study  Critics of the formulas (e.g., Bruce et al. 
1981, Redish and Selzer; Redish 2000) also refer to the elaborate study of oral 
jury instructions by attorney Robert Charrow and linguist Veda Charrow (1979). 
They claimed that simplifying text did not make verbal instructions more 
comprehensible.  
The authors did not use the readability variables in re-writing jury instructions 
but simplified the instructions using a list of common legal “linguistic 
constructions.” These were: nominalizations, unusual prepositional phrases, 
misplaced phrases, whiz deletions (use of participles instead of verbs), deletions 
of “that” or “which” beginning dependent clauses, technical legal terms, 
imperative terms, negatives, passive voice, word lists, organization, and 
dependent clauses. 
The first experiment used 35 persons called for jury duty in Maryland using 14 
jury instructions taken from California’s standard civil jury instructions. The 
purpose of the study was mainly to see if it was the complexity of the legal issues 
that made the instructions difficult or the difficulty of the language used. A group 
of attorneys were asked to rate the instructions according to their perceived 
complexity.  
The experimenters tested each person individually by playing each instruction 
twice on a tape recorder. After hearing each instruction, the subject then verbally 
paraphrased the instruction, which was also recorded. The results showed, 
contrary to the attorneys’ expectations, it was not the complexity of the ideas that 
caused problems in comprehension, but the difficulty of the language.

The Principles of Readability 
Copyright © 2004 William H. DuBay Page 42 
The second experiment used 48 persons chosen for jury duty in Maryland. For 
this experiment, they re-wrote the instructions, paying close attention to the legal 
constructions noted above. They divided the group into two. Using 28 original 
and modified instructions, they gave seven original instructions and seven 
modified instructions to each group. They used the same protocols in playing the 
instructions twice and asking the subjects to paraphrase them. 
There was a significant improvement of the mean scores in comprehension in 
nine of the fourteen instructions. They concluded that the subjects understood 
the gist of the original only 45% of the time and the simpler ones 59% of the 
time.  
This is not good enough, according to Professor Robert Benson (1984-85) of 
Loyola Law School in Los Angeles. He wrote, “…none of us would care to be 
tried by jurors who understood only 59% of their instructions.”  
Benson went on to say that the Charrows own data was leading them to a 
conclusion that they were unable to draw: that juries are never likely to 
understand oral instructions adequately. Elwork, Sales, and Alfini (1982) reach 
the same conclusion and recommend giving all jurors written as well as oral 
instructions.  
To prove his point, Benson included three of the Charrows’ re-written 
instructions in his own study on legal language using 90 law students and 100 
non-lawyers. Using cloze tests, he found that, while the Charrows had reported 
59% comprehension, the readers understood the written instructions almost fully 
(p. 546).  
As to the claim that paraphrasing is better than other testing techniques, Benson 
claims that it has its own limitations, depending as it does on the subjects’ ability 
to orally articulate what they understand. The Charrows had avoided asking the 
subjects to paraphrase in writing because “subject’s writing skills would 
confound the results.” Unfortunately, they ignored similar possible differences in 
their listening and their oral skills (Benson, p. 537).  
The Charrows state that sentence length does not cause reading difficulty. 
“Although readability formulas are easy to use,” they write, “and certainly do 
indicate the presence of lengthy sentences, they cannot be considered measures 
of comprehensibility. Linguistic research has shown that sentences of the same 
length may vary greatly in actual comprehensibility” (p. 1319).  
Benson answered by writing that extremely long sentences such as those found 
in legal language are known to cause difficulty, probably because of memory 
constraints. He also found that the Charrows’ revised instructions had actually 
shortened sentences by 35 percent. The shorter sentences “may well have played 
a role in improved comprehension” (pp. 552-553).  
A number of studies show that, in the average, as a sentence increases in length it 
increases in difficulty (e.g., Coleman, 1962, Bormuth 1966). Average sentence 
length has long been one of the clearest predictors of text difficulty.

The Principles of Readability 
Copyright © 2004 William H. DuBay Page 43 
The New Readability Formulas 
Critics of the formulas and formula developers questioned the reliability of the 
criterion passages, criterion scores, and the reading tests on which the formulas 
had been developed and validated. The arrival of cloze testing stimulated the 
development of new criterion passages, new formulas, manual aids, 
computerized versions, and the continued testing of text variables. 
The Coleman formulas  Edmund B. Coleman (1965), in a research project 
sponsored by the National Science Foundation, published four readability 
formulas for general use. The formulas are notable for their predicting mean 
close scores (percentage of correct cloze completions).  
Coleman was also the first to use cloze procedures as a criterion rather than the 
conventional multiple-choice reading tests or rankings by judges.  
The four formulas use different variables as shown here: 
C% = 1.29w – 38.45 
C% = 1.16w + 1.48s – 37.95 
C% = 1.07s  +  1.18s + .76p – 34.02 
C% = 1.04w + 1.06s + .56p – .36prep – 26.01 
Where:  C% = percentage of correct cloze completions; 
 w = number of one-syllable words per 100 words 
 s = number of sentences per 100 words 
 p = number of pronouns per 100 words 
 prep = number of prepositions per 100 words 
Coleman found multiple correlations of .86, .89, .90, and .91, respectively, for 
his formulas with cloze criterion scores. The use of cloze scores as criterion 
consistently provides higher validation coefficients than does use of the multiple-
choice scores. This may be a partial reason for the high correlations shown here. 
The Bormuth studies   Recognizing the problems of having more reliable 
criterion passages, John Bormuth conducted several extensive studies, which 
gave a new empirical foundation for the formulas. His first study (1966) 
provided evidence of just how much changes in a number of readability variables 
beside just vocabulary and sentence length can affect comprehension. Cloze 
testing made it possible to measure the effects of those variables not just on the 
difficulty of whole passages but also on individual words, phrases, and clauses.  
His subjects included the entire enrollment of students (675) in grades 4 through 
8 of Wasco Union Elementary School district in California. Their reading levels 
went from the 2nd through the 12th grade. He used 20 passages of 275 to 300 
words each, rated on the Dale-Chall formula from the 4th to the 8th-grade levels 
of difficulty. He used five cloze tests for each passage, with the fifth-word 
deletions starting at different words.  
Reading researchers recognized that beginning readers relate differently to word 
variables than do better readers. For this reason, special formulas have been 
developed for the earliest primary grades such as the Spache formula (1953) and 
the Harris-Jacobson primary readability formula (1973).  
Bormuth’s study confirmed the curvilinearity of the formula variables. That 
means their correlation with text difficulty changes in the upper grades,  
producing a curve when plotted on a chart. Dale and Chall (1948) included an 
adjustment for this feature in their formula-correction chart. This adjustment was 
also included in the SMOG formula (McLaughlin 1968), the Fry Graph (Fry

The Principles of Readability 
Copyright © 2004 William H. DuBay Page 44 
1969), the FORCAST formula (Caylor et al. 1973), Degrees of Reading Progress 
(Koslin et al. 1987), and the ATOS formula (Paul 2003). 
Some critics of the formulas (Rothkopf 1972, Thorndike 1973-74, Selzer 1981, 
Redish and Selzer 1985) claim that decoding words and sentences is not a 
problem for adults. Bormuth’s study, however, shows that the correlation 
between the formula variables and comprehension do not change as a function of 
reading ability (p. 105). Empirical studies have confirmed that, in adult readers, 
difficulty in reading is linked to word recognition (Stanovich 1984) and 
decoding of sentences (Massad 1977). We cannot assume that adults are better 
learners than children of the same reading level. In fact, they are often worse 
(Russell 1973, Sticht 1982).  
Bormuth’s next project (1969) was a study of the readability variables and their 
relationship to comprehension. His subjects included 2,600 fourth-to-twelfth-
grade pupils in a Minneapolis school district.  
The method consisted first in rating the reading ability of all the students with 
the California 1963 Reading Achievement test. It used 330 different passages of 
about 100 words each to confirm the reliability of 164 different variables, many 
of them never examined before such as the parts of speech, active and passive 
voice, verb complements, and compound nouns.  
The five cloze tests used for each passage (resulting in 1,650 tests) gave him 
about 276 responses for each deleted word, resulting in over 2 million responses 
to analyze. 
With this data, Bormuth was able to develop 24 new readability formulas, some 
of which used 14 to 20 variables. These new variables, he found, added little to 
the validity of the two classic-formula variables and were eventually dropped. 
The study divided the students of each reading level into two groups, one that 
was given a multiple-choice test and the other a cloze test of the same material. 
Since Thorndike’s (1916) recommendation, educators and textbook publishers 
had used 75% correct scores on a multiple-choice test as the criterion for 
optimum difficulty for assisted classroom learning, and 90% for independent 
reading. These criterion scores, however, were based on convention and use, not 
on scientific study.  
This Bormuth study validated the equivalencies of 35%, 45%, and 55% correct 
cloze criterion scores with 50%, 75%, and 90% correct multiple-choice scores. It 
also showed that the cloze score of 35% correct answers indicates the level of 
difficulty required for maximum information gain.  
Finally, this study produced three different formulas, one is for basic use, one for 
machine use, and one for manual use. All three formulas predict the difficulty of 
texts for all grade levels using a 35%, 45%, 55%, or a mean-cloze criterion.  
The Bormuth Mean Cloze formula  This formula uses three variables: number 
of words on the original Dale-Chall list of 3,000, average sentence length in 
words, and average word length in letters. This formula was later adapted and 
used in the Degrees of Reading Power used by the College Entrance 
Examination Board in 1981 (see below).

The Principles of Readability 
Copyright © 2004 William H. DuBay Page 45 
The original Bormuth Mean Cloze formula is: 
R = .886593 – .083640 (LET/W) + .161911 (DLL/W)3  
     – 0.021401 ( W/SEN) + .000577 (W/SEN)2 
       – .000005 (W/SEN)3 
DRP = (1 – R ) x 100 
Where:  R = mean cloze score 
 LET = letters in passage X 
 W = words in passage X 
 DLL = Number of words in the original Dale-Chall list in 
passage X 
 SEN = Sentences in passage X 
 DRP = Degrees of Reading Power, on a 0-100 scale  
 with 30 (very easy) to 100 (very hard) 
The findings of Bormuth about the reliability of the classic variables were 
confirmed by MacGinitie and Tretiak (1971) who said that the newer syntactic 
variables proposed by the cognitive theorists correlated so highly with sentence 
length that they added little accuracy to the measurement. They concluded that 
average sentence length is the best predictor of syntactic difficulty. 
The Bormuth studies provided formula developers with a host of new criterion 
passages. Critics of the formulas claimed that the criterion passages used by 
formula developers were arbitrary or out-of-date (Bruce et al. 1981, Duffy, 
1985). As new criterion passages became available, developers used them to 
create new formulas and to correct and reformulate the older ones (Bormuth 
1966, 1969, Klare 1985). The new Dale-Chall formula (1995) was validated 
against a variety of criterion passages, including 32 developed by Bormuth 
(1971), 36 by Miller and Coleman (1967), 12 by Caylor et al. (1973) and 80 by 
MacGinitie and Tretiak (1971). Other formulas were validated against normed 
passages from military technical manuals (Caylor et al. 1973, Kincaid et al. 
1975). 
The Fry Readability Graph  While Edward Fry (1963, 1968) was working as a 
Fullbright scholar in Uganda trying to help teachers teach English as a second 
language, he created one of the most popular readability tests that use a graph.  
 
Fig. 11. Edward Fry. His 
Readability Graph may be the 
most popular readability aid. 
Fry would go on to become the director of the 
Reading Center of Rutgers University and an 
authority on how people learn to read. 
Fry’s original graph determines readability 
through high school. It was validated with 
comprehension scores of primary and secondary 
school materials and by correlations with other 
formulas.  
Fry (1969) later extended the graph to primary 
levels. In 1977, he extended it through the college 
years (Fig. 11). Although vocabulary continues to 
increase during college years, reading ability 
varies much, depending on both individuals and 
the subjects taught. That means that a text with a 
score of 16 will be more difficult than one with a 
score of 14. It does not mean, however, that one 
is appropriate for all seniors and the other for all 
sophomores.

The Principles of Readability 
Copyright © 2004 William H. DuBay Page 46 
Directions: 
1. Select samples of 100 words.  
2. Find y (vertical), the average number of sentences per 100-word 
passage (calculating to the nearest tenth).  
3. Find x (horizontal), the average number of syllables per 100-word 
sample. 
4. The zone where the two coordinates meet shows the grade score. 
 
Fig. 12. The Fry Readability Graph as amended in 1977 with the extension 
into the primary and college grades. Scores that appear in the dark areas 
are invalid. 
The Listening Formulas  People have been concerned about the clarity of 
spoken language perhaps for a longer period than written language. Speech is 
generally much simpler than text. Because a listener cannot re-read a spoken 
sentence, it puts a greater demand on memory. For this reason, “writing like you 
talk” and reading text aloud have long been methods for improving readability. 
Studies of the correlations of listenability and readability have had mixed results 
(Klare 1963). 
Some formulas have been developed just for spoken text. Rogers (1962) 
published a formula for predicting the difficult of spoken text. He used 480 
samples of speech taken from the unrehearsed and typical conversations of 
students in elementary, middle, and high school as his data for developing his 
formula. The resulting formula is: 
G = .669 I + .4981 LD – 2.0625 
Where: 
G = reading grade level 
I = average idea unit length 
LD = the average number of words in a hundred-word sampling that do not 
appear on Dale’s long list (3,000 words). 
Roger’s formula has a multiple correlation of .727 with the grade level of his 
samples.

The Principles of Readability 
Copyright © 2004 William H. DuBay Page 47 
Irving Fang (1966-1967) used newscasts to develop his Easy Listening Formula 
(ELF), shown here: 
ELF = number of syllables above one per word in a sentence.  
An average sentence should have an ELF score below 12 for easy listenability. 
Fang found a correlation of .96 between his formula and Flesch’s Reading Ease 
formula on 36 television scripts and 36 newspaper samples. 
Subsequent research into listenability indicates that after the 8th grade, listening 
skills do not keep up with the improvement in reading skills. After the 12th-grade 
level, the same text may be harder to understand when heard than when read 
(Chall 1983b; Dale and Chall 1995; Sticht, Beck, et al. 1974). 
The SMOG formula  G. Harry McLaughlin (1969) published his SMOG 
formula in the belief that the word length and sentence length should be 
multiplied rather than added. By counting the number of words of more than two 
syllables (polysyllable count) in 30 sentences, he provides this simple formula: 
SMOG grading = 3 + square root of polysyllable count. 
McLaughlin validated his formula against the McCall-Crabbs passages. He used 
a 100 percent correct-score criterion. As a result, his formula generally predicts 
scores at least two grades higher than the Dale-Chall formula.   
The FORCAST formula  The Human Resources Research Organization studied 
the reading requirements of military occupational specialties in the U.S. Army 
(Caylor, Sticht, Fox, and Ford. 1973). In order to resolve professional questions 
about using a formula for technical material read by adults, the authors first 
undertook the creating of a readability formula that would be: 
1. Based on essential Army-job reading material. 
2. Adjusted for the young adult-male Army-recruit population.  
3. Simple and easy for standard clerical personnel to apply without special 
training or equipment.  
The researchers first selected seven high-density jobs and 12 passages that 
recruits are required to understand to qualify for them. They graded the passages 
with the modified Flesch formula, finding them to range from the 6th to the 13th 
grade in difficulty. They also selected 15 text variables to study for a new 
formula. They next tested the reading ability of 395 Army recruits, and then 
divided them into two groups, one with a mean-grade reading level of 9.40 and 
another 9.42. 
They next tested the recruits with cloze tests made of the 12 passages. The 12 
passages were then re-graded using the criterion of at least 50% of those subjects 
of a certain grade level being obtaining a cloze score of at least 35%. Results 
indicated that average subjects scored 35.1% on the text graded 9.1 and 33.5% 
on the text graded 9.6. 
They next intercorrelated the results of the reading tests with the results of the 
graded cloze tests. Results showed usable correlations of .83 and .75 for the two 
groups of readers. Among the 15 variables they examined, the number of one-
syllable words in the passage correlated highest (.86) and was selected for use in 
their new formula. Because they found that adding a sentence factor did not 
improve the reliability of the formula, they left it out.

The Principles of Readability 
Copyright © 2004 William H. DuBay Page 48 
The resulting FORCAST formula is: 
Grade level = 20 – ( N ÷ 10 ) 
Where N = number of single-syllable words in a 150-word sample. 
The new formula correlated r = 9.2 with the Flesch Reading Ease formula, 9.4 
with the original Dale-Chall formula with, and r = .87 with the graded text 
passages with. It is accurate from the 5th to the 12th grade. 
They cross-validated the formula with a second study using another sample of 
365 Army recruits at Ford Ord using another sample of reading passages scaled 
from grade 7 to grade 12.7 using the FORCAST formula. The results of this 
experiment correlated r = .98 with the Flesch formula, .98 with Dale-Chall, and 
.77 with the graded military passages. These figures were judged appropriate for 
the purpose of the formula. 
Using the FORCAST formula, they tested the critical job-reading materials for 
readability. The results show the percentage of materials in each occupation 
written at the 9.9 grade level: Medical specialist, 24.4%; Light Weapons 
Infantryman, 18.3%; Military Policeman, 15.1%; General Vehicle Repairman, 
13.4%; Amorer/Unit Supply Specialist, 10.8%; Ground Control Radar 
Repairman, 4.2%, and Personnel Specialist, 2.2%. 
The study showed that materials for the different occupations all had texts above 
the 9th grade. This suggested the need for new quality-control measures for 
making materials more useful for the majority of personnel.   
 
Fig. 13. Thomas Sticht. After participating 
in the military studies which resulted in the 
FORCAST readability formula, he went on 
to become a worldwide authority in adult 
literacy. He is shown here with UNESCO's 
Mahatma Gandhi Medal he received in 
2003 for his contributions to that field. The 
citation reads: 
"The UNESCO Mahatma Gandhi Bronze 
Medal has been awarded to Dr. Thomas 
Sticht (USA) in deep appreciation of his 25 
years of service as a member of UNESCO's 
International Jury for Literacy Prizes and in 
recognition of his devotion to the cause of 
adult literacy, especially for his efforts to 
'reach the unreached.'" 
In a follow-up study, Lydia Hooke and colleagues (1979) validated of the use of 
the FORCAST formula on technical regulations for the Air Force. They also 
found that four of seven writers of the regulations underestimated the grade level 
of their materials by more than one grade.  
In the main portion of the Hooke study, they administered cloze and reading tests 
to 900 AF personnel to determine the comprehension of each regulation by the 
user audience. Where there was no literacy gap (difficulty too high for the 
reader), they found that comprehension was adequate (at least 40% cloze score) 
in all cases. Where a literacy gap did exist, comprehension scores were below 
the criterion of 40% in three of four cases. 
The FORCAST formula is very unusual in that it does not use a sentence-length 
measurement. This makes it a favorite, however, for use with short statements 
and the text in Web sites, applications, and forms.  The Department of the Air

The Principles of Readability 
Copyright © 2004 William H. DuBay Page 49 
Force (1977) authorized the use of this formula in an instruction for writing 
understandable publications. 
The following are two of the scaled passages taken from training materials and 
used in the occupational specialty study for the development and validation of 
the FORCAST formula. Also shown are: 1. The scaled Reading Grade Level 
(RGL), the mean reading grade level of the subjects who scored 35% correct 
scores on the cloze tests; and 2. The scores of the FORCAST, the Flesch, and the 
original Dale-Chall readability grade levels.  
Passage 21 
If you do not have a compass, you can find direction by other methods.  
The North Star. North of the equator, the North Star shows you true 
north. To find the North Star— 
Look for the Big Dipper. The two stars at the end of the bowl are called 
the “pointers.” In a straight line out from the pointers is the North Star 
(at about five times the distance between the pointers). The Big Dipper 
rotates slowly around the North Star and does not always appear in the 
same position. 
You can also use the constellation Cassiopeia. This group of five bright 
stars is shaped like a lopsided M (or W, when it is low in the sky). The 
North Star is straight out from the center star about the same distance 
as from the Big Dipper. Cassiopeia also rotates slowly around the North 
Star and is always almost opposite the Big Dipper. 
Scaled RGL = 6. FORCAST = 8.6. Flesch = 7. Dale-Chall =7-8.  
Passage 15 
Adequate protection from the elements and environmental conditions 
must be provided by means of proper storage facilities, preservation, 
packaging, packing or a combination of any or all of these measures. 
To adequately protect most items from the damaging effects of water or 
water-vapors, adequate preservation must be provided. This is often 
true even though the item is to be stored in a warehouse provided with 
mechanical means of controlling the temperature and humidity. Several 
methods by which humidity is controlled are in use by the military 
services. Use is also made of mechanically ventilating and 
dehumidifying selected sections of existing warehouses. Appropriate 
consideration will be given to the preparation and care of items stored 
under specific types of storage such as controlled humidity, 
refrigerated, and heated. The amount and levels of preservation, 
packaging, and packing will be governed by the specific method of 
storage plus the anticipated length of storage.  
Scaled RGL = 11.4. FORCAST = 12.1. Flesch = 13-16. Dale-Chall = 
13-15.  
The Army’s Automated Readability Index (ARI) For the U.S. Army, Smith 
and Senter (1967) created the Automated Readability Index, which used an 
electric typewriter modified with three micro switches attached to cumulative 
counters for words and sentences.  
The ARI formula produces reading grade levels (GL): 
GL = 0.50 (words per sentence) + 4.71 (strokes per word) – 21.43. 
Smith and Kincaid (1970) successfully validated the ARI on technical materials 
in both manual and computer modes. 
The Navy Readability Indexes  (NRI)  Kincaid, Fishburne, Rogers, and 
Chissom (1975, Fishburne 1976) followed a trend by recalculating new versions 
of older formulas and testing them for use on Navy materials. The first part of 
the experiment aimed at the recalculation of readability formulas. The second

The Principles of Readability 
Copyright © 2004 William H. DuBay Page 50 
part of the study aimed at validating the effectiveness of the recalculated 
formulas on Navy materials as measured by: 
• Comprehension scores on Navy training manuals  
• Learning time, considered being an important measurement of 
readability. 
The first part of the study first determined the reading levels of 531 Navy 
personnel using the comprehension section of the Gates-MacGinitie reading test. 
At the same time, they tested their comprehension of 18 passages taken from 
Navy training manuals. The results of those tests were used in calculating the 
grade levels of the passages. They then used those passages to recalculate the 
ARI, Flesch, and Fog Count formulas for Navy use, now called the Navy 
Readability Indexes (NRIs). The recalculated grade-level (GL) formulas are: 
ARI simplified: 
GL = .4 (words per sentence) + 6 (strokes per word) – 27.4 
Fog Count new: 
GL = ((easy words  +  3 (hard words))  ⁄  (sentences) ) – 3 
 2 
Where: 
easy words = number of number of 1 and 2-syllable words per 100 
words 
hard words = number of words of more than 2 syllables per 100 words 
sentences = number of sentences per 100 words 
Flesch Reading Ease formula simplified and converted to grade level (now 
known as the Flesch-Kincaid readability formula): 
New: 
GL = (.39 x ASL) + (11.8 x ASW) – 15.59 
Simplified: 
GL =  ( .4 ASL ) + ( 12 ASW ) – 15 
Where: 
ASL = average sentence length (the number of words divided by the 
number of sentences).   
ASW = average number of syllables per word (the total number 
syllables in the sample divided by the number of words).  
The second part of the study looked at the relationship between readability and 
learning time. It monitored the progress of 200 Navy technical-training students 
through four modules of their course for both comprehension and learning time. 
The study was replicated with a secondary sample of 100 subjects performing on 
four additional modules. 
The results of the comprehension test showed the highest percentage of errors in 
both the readers with the lowest reading grade levels and in the modules with the 
highest grade-levels of readability.  
In the same manner, the learning time systematically decreased with reading 
ability and increased with the difficulty of the modules. The study confirms that 
learning time as well as reading ability are significant performance measures for 
predicting readability. 
The new Flesch-Kincaid formula was able to predict significant differences 
between modules less than one grade level apart using both comprehension

The Principles of Readability 
Copyright © 2004 William H. DuBay Page 51 
scores and learning times. The U.S. Department of Defense (1978) authorized 
this formula in new procedures for validating the readability of technical 
manuals for the Armed Services. The Internal Revenue Service, and the Social 
Services Administration also issued similar directives.   
Both Kern (1979) and Duffy (1985) urge the military to abandon use of the 
formulas. They note that writers in the military often find the task of simplifying 
texts below the 10th grade “too difficult” and “not worth the trouble.” 
Unfortunately, there are no practical alternatives to the skill hard work required 
to create simple language. When large numbers of readers are involved, even 
small increases in comprehension pay off.  
The Hull formula for technical writing At the 1979 STC conference, Leon C. 
Hull (1979) argued that technical writing, with its increased use of difficult 
words, needs a special kind of formula. While acknowledging that the 
FORCAST and Kincaid formulas were developed precisely for that reason, he 
looked for a formula that does not use word length as a variable.  
Basing his work on Bloomer (1959) and Bormuth (1969) as well as his own 
experience as a technical writer, Hull claims that an increase in the number of 
adjectives and adverbs before a noun lowers comprehension. His study indicates 
that the modifier load is almost as predictive as a syllable count, more causal, 
and more helpful for rewriting.  
Hull devised four cloze tests of each of five criterion passages from the Kincaid 
study. The first test was the original passage. Each of the other tests increased 
one of three indicators of modifier load by at least 50%: density of modifiers, 
ambiguity of modifiers, and density of prepositions. The subjects were 107 
science, engineering, and management students enrolled in a senior course in 
technical and professional communication at Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute.  
The mean cloze scores on the five unaltered passages correlated (r = ) 0.882 with 
the Kincaid reading-grade levels assigned to these passages. This result justified 
both the subject sampling and the use of the test results to produce a new 
formula. The test results confirm the negative effect (r = -0.664) of modifier 
density on comprehension. They also indicated that sentence length is a valid 
indicator for technical material, perhaps better than word difficulty (contrary to 
previous research).  
Hull developed first formula with five variables, which accounts for (r2 = ) 68% 
of passage difficulty. Like others before him, he found that the difficulty of using 
a larger number of variables reduces the reliability of the formula and makes it 
impractical. He created a another formula, shown here, that uses only sentence 
length and the density of modifiers (called prenomial modifiers) and accounts for 
(r2 = ) 48% of passage difficulty. Though slightly less valid than the Kincaid 
formula, it is as accurate as many other popular formulas: 
Grade level = 0.49 (average sentence length) 
      + 0.29 (prenomial modifiers per 100 words) – 2.71 
In the conclusion of his paper, Hull advises technical writers that using shorter 
sentences reduces their complexity and makes them easier to read. He also 
recommends eliminating strings of nouns, adjectives, and adverbs as modifiers. 
Instead, writers should use prepositional phrases and place adjectives in the 
predicate position (after the verb) rather than in the distributive position (before 
the noun).  
Degrees of Reading Power (DRP)  In 1981, the College Entrance Examination 
Board dropped its use of grade-level reading scores and adopted the Degrees of

The Principles of Readability 
Copyright © 2004 William H. DuBay Page 52 
Reading Power (DRP) system developed by Touchstone Applied Science 
Associates (Koslin et al. 1987, Zeno et al. 1995).  
The DRP uses the Bormuth Mean Cloze formula to predict scores on a 0 (easy) 
to 100 (difficult) scale, which can be used for scoring both text readability and 
student reading skills. The popular children's book Charlotte’s Web has a DRP 
value of 50. Likewise, students with DRP test scores of 50 (at the independent 
level) are capable of reading Charlotte’s Web and easier texts independently. 
The Board also uses this system to provide readability reports on instructional 
materials used by school systems. 
Computerized writing aids  Beginning in the 1980s, the first computer 
programs appeared that not only contained the formulas but also other writing 
aids. The Writer’s Workbench, developed at Bell Laboratories became the most 
popular of these (Macdonald, Frase, Gingrich, and Keenan 1982). It contains 
several readability indexes, stylistic analysis, average lengths of words and 
sentences, spelling, punctuation, faulty phrases, percentages of passive verbs, a 
reference on English usage, and many other features.  
Kincaid, Aagard, O’Hara, and Cottrell (1981) developed CRES, a computer 
readability editing system for the U.S. Navy. It contains a readability formula 
and flags uncommon words, long sentences, and offers the writer alternatives.   
Today, popular word processors such as Microsoft Word and Corel WordPerfect 
include a combination of spell checkers, grammar checkers, and readability 
formulas to help in creating texts that are more readable. Note that the Flesch-
Kincaid Grade Level in Word’s Readability Statistics is defective in that it only 
goes to the 12th grade.  
Lexile Framework  At the height of the controversy about the readability 
formulas, the founders of MetaMetrics, Inc. (Stenner, Horabin, et al. 1988a) 
published a new system for measuring readability, Lexile Framework, which 
uses average sentence length and average word frequency found in the American 
Heritage Intermediate Corpus (Carroll et al. 1971) to predict a score on a 0–
2000 scale. The AHI corpus includes five million words from 1,045 published 
titles to which students in grades three through nine are commonly exposed. 
The cognitive theorists had claimed that different kinds of reading tests actually 
measure different kinds of comprehension. The studies of the Lexile theorists 
(Stenner et al. 1988b, Stenner and Burdick 1997) indicate that comprehension is 
a one-dimensional ability that subsumes different types of comprehension (e.g., 
literal or inferential) and other reader factors (e.g., prior knowledge and special 
subject knowledge). You either understand a passage or you don’t.  
The New Dale-Chall Readability Formula  In Readability Revisited: The New 
Dale-Call Readability Formula, Chall and Dale (1995) updated their list of 
3,000 easy words and improved their original formula, then 47 years old. The 
new formula was validated against a variety of criteria, including: 
• 32 passages tested by Bormuth (1971) on 4th to 12th-grade students. 
• 36 passages tested by Miller and Coleman (1967) on 479 college 
students. 
• 80 passages tested by MacGinitie and Tretiak (1971) on college and 
graduate students. 
• 12 technical passages tested by Caylor et al. (1973) on 395 Air Force 
trainees.  
The new formula was also cross-validated with: 
• The Gates-MacGinitie Reading Test

The Principles of Readability 
Copyright © 2004 William H. DuBay Page 53 
• The Diagnostic Assessments of Reading and Trial Teaching Strategies 
(DARTTS) 
• The National Assessment of Reading Progress 
• The Spache Formula 
• The Fry Graph 
• Average judgments of teachers on the reading level of 50 passages of 
literature 
 
Fig 14. Jeanne S. 
Chall. She created 
the Harvard Reading 
Lab and directed it for 
20 years. 
The new formula correlates .92 with the Bormuth Mean Cloze 
Scores, making it the most valid of the popular formulas.  
At the time of writing this, the new Dale-Chall formula is not yet 
available on the Internet. It was once available in a computer 
program, “Readability Master,” but is hard to find. You can easily 
apply the formula manually, however, using the instructions, 
worksheet, word list, and tables provided in the book. The book 
also has several chapters reviewing readability research, the uses 
of the formulas, the importance of vocabulary, the readability 
controversies, and a chapter on writing readable texts. 
The following are two of the sample passages in the book, with the 
difficult words not found on their new word list underlined (pp. 
135-140). The right-hand column gives a few readability statistics, 
the New Dale-Chall mean cloze score, and reading grade level. 
 Grades 5-6 
Eskimos of Alaska’s Arctic north coast 
have hunted whales for centuries. 
Survival has depended on killing the 80-
foot-long bowhead whales that swim from 
the Bering Sea to the ice-clogged 
Beaufort Sea each Spring. The Eskimos’ 
entire way of life has been centered 
around the hunt. 
But now that way of life is being 
threatened by America’s need for oil, say 
many Eskimos who hunt the whales.  
Huge amounts of oil may be beneath the 
Beaufort Sea. And oil companies want to 
begin drilling this spring. 
However, many Eskimos say severe 
storms and ice conditions make drilling 
dangerous… 
From My Weekly Reader, Edition 6 
Readability Data 
Number of Words in Sample 100 
Number of Whole Sentences 6 
Number of Unfamiliar Words 11 
Cloze Score    42 
Reading Level    5-6

The Principles of Readability 
Copyright © 2004 William H. DuBay Page 54 
Grades 9-10 
The controversy over the laser-armed 
satellite boils down to two related 
questions: Will it be technically  effective? 
And should the United States make a 
massive effort to deploy it? 
To its backers, the laser seems the 
perfect weapon. Traveling in a straight 
line at 186,000 miles per second, a laser 
beam is tens of thousands of times as 
fast as any bullet or rocket. It could strike 
its target with a power of many watts per 
square inch. The resulting heat, combined 
with a mechanical shock wave created by 
recoil as surface layers were blasted 
away, could quickly melt… 
From Discover 
Readability Data 
Number of Words in Sample 100 
Number of Whole Sentences 5 
Number of Unfamiliar Words 23 
Cloze Score   28 
Reading Level   9-10 
ATOS readability formula for books  Researchers at School Renaissance 
Institute (1999, 2000, Paul 2003) and Touchstone Applied Science Associates 
produced the Advantage-TASA Open Standard (ATOS) Readability Formula for 
Books. Their goal was to create an “open” formula that would be available to the 
educational community free of charge, that would be easy to use, and that could 
be used with any nationally normed reading tests. 
The project was perhaps the most extensive study of readability ever conducted. 
Formula developers used 650 norm-referenced reading tests, 474 million words 
representing all the text of 28,000 K–12 books read by real students with many 
published in the previous five years, an expanded vocabulary list, and the reader 
records of more than 30,000 students who read and tested on 950,000 actual 
books. 
The readability formula was part of a computerized system to help teachers 
conduct a program of guided independent reading to maximize learning gains.  
Noting the differences in difficulty between samples and entire books, the 
developers claim this is the first readability formula based on whole books, not 
just samples.  
They found that the combination of three variables gives the best account of text 
difficulty: words per sentence (r2 = .897), the average grade-level of words (r2 = 
.891), and characters per word (r2 = .839). The formula produces grade-level 
scores, as they are easier for teachers to understand and use.  
The formula developers paid special attention to the Zone of Proximal 
Development (ZPD) proposed by Vygotsky (1978), the level of optimal 
difficulty that produces the most learning gain. They found that, for independent 
reading below the 4th grade, maximum learning gain requires at least 85% 
comprehension. Advanced readers need a 92% score on reading quizzes. Those 
who exceed that percentage should be given material that is more challenging.  
Other results of the studies indicate that: 
• Maximum learning gain requires careful matching of book readability 
and reading skill. 
• The amount of time spent reading correlates highly with gains in 
reading skill. 
• Book length can be a good indication of readability. 
• Feedback and teacher interaction are the most important factors in 
accelerated reading growth.

The Principles of Readability 
Copyright © 2004 William H. DuBay Page 55 
Formula Applications 
Many researchers outside the field of reading have recognized the value of the 
formulas. Edward Fry (1986) points out that articles on the readability formulas 
are among the most frequently cited articles of all types of educational research. 
The applications give researchers an objective means of controlling the difficulty 
of passages in their experiments.  
The following is a sample of readability studies that used formulas: political 
literature (Zingman 1977), corporate annual reports (Courtis 1987), customer 
service manuals (Squires and Ross 1990) drivers’ manuals (Stahl and Henk 
1995), dental health information (Alexander 2000), palliative-care information 
(Payne et al. 2000), research consent forms (Hochhauser 2002; Mathew 2002; 
Paasche-Orlow et al. 2003), informed consent forms (Williams et al. 2003) 
online health information (Oermann and Wilson 2000), lead-poison brochures 
(Endres et al. 2002) online privacy notices (Graber et al. 2002) medical journals 
(Weeks and Wallace 2002), environmental health information (Harvey and 
Fleming 2003) and mental-health information (King et al. 2003). 
Court actions and legislation  Fry (1989a) points out that the validity of the 
formulas has been challenged in court and found suitable for legal purposes. The 
courts increasingly rely on readability formulas to show the readability of texts in 
protecting the rights of citizens to clear information. Court cases and legislation 
involving government documents and correspondence, criminal rights, product 
labeling, private contracts, insurance policies, ballot measures, warranties, and 
warnings are some of the legal applications of the formulas. 
In 1984, Joseph David of New York was upset by his inability to understand a 
letter of denial he received in response to his appeal for Medicare benefits. Legal 
Services went to court in behalf of David and other elderly recipients of 
Medicare in New York. They pointed out that 48% of the population over 65 
had less than a 9th-grade education. Edward Fry testified in court that the denial 
letter was written at the 16th-grade level. As a result, the judge ordered the 
Secretary Heckler of the U.S. Department of Health and Social Services to take 
“prompt action” to improve the readability of Medicare communications (David 
vs. Heckler 1984). 
A number of federal laws require plain language such as the Truth in Lending 
Act, the Civil Rights Act of 1964, and the Electronic Funds Transfer Act. In June 
1998, President Clinton directed all federal agencies to issue all documents and 
regulations in plain language.   
Beginning in 1975, a number of states passed plain-language laws covering such 
common documents as bank loans, insurance policies, rental agreements, and 
property-purchase contracts. These laws often state that if a written 
communication fails the readability requirement, the offended party may sue and 
collect damages. Such failures have resulted in court judgments.  
States such as California also require plain language in all agency documents, 
including “any contract, form, license, announcement, regulation, manual, 
memorandum, or any other written communication that is necessary to carry out 
the agency's responsibilities under the law” (Section 6215 of the California 
Government Code). California defines plain language as “written or displayed so 
that the meaning of regulations will be easily understood by those persons 
directly affected by them” (Section 11349 of the Administrative Code).  
Textbook publishers   After 80 years, textbook publishers consider the grade 
level of textbooks as more important than cost, the choice of personnel, or the 
physical features of books. All of them use word-frequency lists. Eighty-nine 
percent of them use readability formulas in evaluating the grade-levels of texts,

The Principles of Readability 
Copyright © 2004 William H. DuBay Page 56 
along with other methods of testing. Widely read children’s publications such as 
My Weekly Reader and magazines published by National Geographic for 
children of different ages have used the formulas along with field-testing and 
other methods (Chall and Conard 1991).  
Using the Formulas 
Formula discrepancies  The discrepancy between the scores of different 
formulas has long been perplexing. For example, the scores for the following 
four paragraphs are: 
Original Dale-Chall grade level: 11-12 
Flesch grade level: 8.9 
FORCAST grade level: 10.9 
SMOG grade level: 11.7 
Fog grade level: 12.3 
Critics have often cited such discrepancies as indications of the lack of precision 
of the formulas. Kern (1979) argued that the discrepancies among the Kincaid 
and Caylor formulas deprive them of usefulness, and that the military should 
discard them. What Kern ignores in his review are the correlations of the 
formulas with comprehension tests. What is important is not how the formulas 
agree or disagree on a particular text, but their degree of consistency in 
predicting difficulty over a range of graded texts.   
The most obvious causes of the discrepancies are the different variables used by 
different formulas and the different criterion scores used in their development. 
The formulas—like reading tests—simply do not have a common zero point 
(Klare 1982). The criterion score is the required level of comprehension 
indicating reading success as indicated by the percentage of correct answers on a 
reading test. For example, a formula can predict the level of reading skill 
required to answer correctly 75 % of the questions on a reading test based on a 
criterion passage. 
The FORCAST and Dale-Chall formula use a 50% criterion score as measured 
by multiple-choice tests. The Flesch formula use a 75% score, Gunning Fog 
formula, a 90% score, and the McLaughlin SMOG formula a 100% score. The 
formulas developed with the higher criterion scores tend to predict higher scores, 
while those the highest validity correlations (e.g., Dale-Chall and Flesch) tend to 
predict lower scores.  
The different methods used by different computer programs to count sentences, 
words, and syllables can also cause discrepancies—even though they use the 
same formula. Finally, the range of scores provided by different formulas remind 
us that they are not perfect predictors. They provide probability statements or 
rather estimates of difficulty. 
The problem of optimal difficulty  Different uses of a text require different 
levels of difficulty. As we have seen, Bormuth (1969) indicated the 35% cloze 
score was the point of optimum learning gain (see Table 7 above) for assisted 
classroom reading. 
Vygotsky (1978) supported Bormuth’s findings that optimal difficulty should be 
slightly above their current level of development and not below. Using books 
that are at the reader’s present level or below may increase fluency and rate, but 
not in the way of comprehension.  
For this reason, reading experts advise that materials intended for assisted 
reading when an instructor is available should be somewhat harder than the 
readers’ tested reading level. Materials for the general public, however, such as 
medicine inserts, instructions for filing tax forms, instructions for using

The Principles of Readability 
Copyright © 2004 William H. DuBay Page 57 
appliances, and health information should be as easy as possible to convey 
(Chall and Dale 1995). 
Paul (2003) found that independent reading requires at least an 85% 
comprehension on multiple-choice reading quizzes for readers below the 4th 
grade and 92% for advanced readers. He also recommends that advanced 
students who score better than 92% correct on quizzes should be given material 
that is more challenging.  
The formulas and usability testing Redish (2000) and Schriver (1991, 2000), 
promote the need for reading protocols and usability testing as an alternative to 
the formulas. They feel that usability testing eliminates the need for readability 
testing. They fail to state, however, how to match the reading ability of subjects 
with that of the target audience.  
Dumas and Redish (1999), in their work on usability testing, hardly mention 
reading comprehension. They have us assume that, if test subjects correctly 
perform a task, they have correctly understood the instructions. When problems 
arise, however, it is difficult to locate the source of the difficulty. 
In both usability testing and reading protocols, some subjects are more skilled 
than others in articulating the problems they encounter. Do problems come from 
the text or from some other source? If they are located in the text, do they come 
from the design, style, organization, coherence, or content? We are often left 
with guesswork and trial-and-error cycles of revision and testing.  
As experience has taught us, this gets expensive. In developing a text, it makes 
as little sense to neglect the readability of a document as it does to neglect its 
punctuation, grammar, coherence, or organization. Readability is not a trivial 
issue. If an audience cannot read a text, they cannot understand it. If they cannot 
understand it, they cannot use it to complete a task.  
Schriver (1997) and Hackos and Redish (1998) correctly emphasize the 
importance of testing and of frequent consultation with members of the targeted 
audience before, during, and after developing a document. Assessing both the 
reading ability of the audience and the readability of the text will greatly 
facilitate this process.  
Conclusion 
Today, the readability formulas are more popular than ever.  There are 
readability formulas for Spanish, French, German, Dutch, Swedish, Russian, 
Hebrew, Hindi, Chinese, Vietnamese, and Korean (Rabin 1988). 
The formulas have survived 80 years of intensive application, investigation, and 
controversy, with both their credentials and limitations remaining intact. The 
national surveys on adult literacy have re-defined our audience for us. Any 
approach to effective communication that ignores these important lessons cannot 
claim to be scientific. If we walk away from this research, others will one day 
rediscover it and apply it to our work as technical communicators.  
The variables used in the readability formulas show us the skeleton of a text. It is 
up to us to flesh out that skeleton with tone, content, organization, coherence, 
and design. Gretchen Hargis of IBM (2000) states that readability research has 
made us very aware of what we “write at the level of words and sentences.”  She 
writes: 
Technical writers have accepted the limited benefit that these 
measurements offer in giving a rough sense of the difficulty of 
material.

The Principles of Readability 
Copyright © 2004 William H. DuBay Page 58 
We have also assimilated readability as an aspect of the quality of 
information through its pervasiveness in areas such as task orientation, 
completeness, clarity, style, and visual effectiveness. We have put into 
practice, through user-centered design, ways to stay focused on the 
needs of our audience and their problems in using the information or 
assistance that we provide with computer products. 
The research on literacy has made us aware of the limited reading abilities of 
many in our audience. The research on readability has made us aware of the 
many factors affecting their success in reading. The readability formulas, when 
used properly, help us increase the chances of that success.

Copyright © 2004 William H. DuBay Page 59 
References 
Alexander, R. E. 2000. “Readability of published dental educational materials.” 
Journal of America dental association 7:937-943. 
Armbruster, B. B. 1984. “The problem of inconsiderate text.” In Comprehension 
instruction, ed. G. Duffey. New York: Longmann, p. 202-217. 
Barr, R. and R. Dreeben. 1984. “Grouping students for reading instruction.” In 
Handbook of reading research, ed. P. D. Pearson. New York: 
Longman, pp. 885-910. 
Benson, R. W. 1984-1985. “The end of legalese: The game is over.” Review of 
law and social change 13, no. 3:519-573. 
Betts, E. 1946. Foundations of reading instruction. New York: American Book 
Company. 
Bloomer, R. H. “Level of abstraction as a function of modifier load.” Journal of 
educational research 52:269-272. 
Bormuth, J. R. 1966. “Readability: A new approach.” Reading research 
quarterly 1:79-132. 
Bormuth, J. R. 1969. Development of readability analysis. Final Report, Project 
no. 7-0052, Contract No. OEC-3-7-070052-0326. Washington, D. C.: 
U.S. Office of Education, Bureau of Research, U.S. Department of 
Health, Education, and Welfare. 
Bormuth, J. R. 1971. Development of standards of readability: Towards a 
rational criterion of passage performance. Washington, D. C.: U.S. 
Office of Education, Bureau of Research, U.S. Department of Health, 
Education, and Welfare. 
Bruce, B., A Rubin, and K. Starr. 1981. Why readability formulas fail: Reading 
Education Report No. 28. Champaign, IL: University of Illinois at 
Urbana-Champaign. 
Buswell, G. 1937. “How adults read.” Supplementary educational monographs 
Number 45. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. In Sticht and 
Armstrong 1994, pp. 43-50. 
Calfee, R. C. and R. Curley. 1984. “Structures of prose in content areas.” In 
Understanding reading comprehension, ed. J Flood. Newark, DE: 
International Reading Association, pp. 161-180. 
Carroll, J. B. 1987. “The national assessments in reading: are we misreading the 
findings?” Phi delta kappan pp. 414-430. 
Carroll, J. B., P. Davies, and B. Richman. 1971. The American Heritage 
Intermediate Corpus. New York: American Heritage Publishing Co. 
Carver, R. P. 1975-1976. “Measuring prose difficulty using the Rauding scale.” 
Reading research quarterly 11:660-685.  
Carver, R. P. 1990. “Predicting accuracy of comprehension from the relative 
difficulty of material.” Learning and individual differences 2: 405-422.  
Caylor, J. S., T. G. Sticht, L. C. Fox, and J. P. Ford. 1973. Methodologies for 
determining reading requirements of military occupational specialties : 
Technical report No. 73-5.  Alexandria, VA: Human Resources 
Research Organization. 
Chall, J. S. 1958. Readability: An appraisal of research and application.  
Columbus, OH: Ohio State University Press. Reprinted 1974. Epping, 
Essex, England: Bowker Publishing Company.

The Principles of Readability 
Copyright © 2004 William H. DuBay Page 60 
Chall, J. S. 1967, 1983. Learning to read: The great debate. New York: 
McGraw-Hill. 
Chall, J. S. 1983b. Stages of reading development. New York: McGraw-Hill. 
Chall, J. S. 1984. “Readability and prose comprehension: Continuities and 
discontinuities.” In Understanding reading comprehension: Cognition, 
language, and the structure of prose, ed. J. Flood. Newark, DE: 
International Reading Association. 
Chall, J. S. 1988. “The beginning years.” In Readability: Its past, present, and 
future, eds. B. L. Zakaluk and S. J. Samuels.  Newark, DE: 
International Reading Association. 
Chall, J. S., and S. S. Conard. 1991. Should textbooks challenge students? The 
case for easier or harder textbooks. New York: Teachers College Press. 
Chall, J. S., G. L. Bissex, S. S. Conard, and S. Harris-Sharples. 1996. 
Qualitative assessment of text difficult: A practical guide for teachers 
and writers. Cambridge, MA: Brookline Books. 
Chall, J. S. and E. Dale. 1995. Readability revisited, the new Dale-Chall 
readability formula. Cambridge, MA: Brookline Books. 
Charrow, V. R. 1977. Let the re-writer beware. Arlington, VA: Center for 
Applied Linguistics. 
Charrow, R. P. and V. R. Charrow. 1979. “Making legal language 
understandable: A psycholinguistic study of jury instructions.” 
Columbia law review 79:1306-1347. 
Chiesi, H. L., G. J. Spilich, and J. F. Voss. 1979. “Acquisition of domain-related 
information in relation to high and low domain knowledge.” Journal of 
verbal learning and verbal behavior 18: 257-273. 
Clark, H. H. and S. E. Haviland. 1977. “Comprehension and the given-new 
contract.” In Discourse Production and Comprehension, ed. R. O. 
Freedle. Norwood NJ: Ablex Press, pp. 1-40.  
Clay, M. 1991. Becoming literate: The construction of inner control. 
Portsmouth, NH: Heinemann. 
College Entrance Examination Board. 1980 and later editions. Degrees of 
reading power (DRP). Princeton, NJ: College Entrance Examination 
Board. 
Coleman, E. B. 1962. “Improving comprehensibility by shortening sentences.” 
Journal of Applied Psychology 46:131.  
Coleman, E. B. 1964. “The comprehensibility of several grammatical 
transformations.” Journal of applied psychology 48:186-190. 
Coleman, E. B. 1965. “On understanding prose: some determiners of its 
complexity.” NSF Final Report GB-2604. Washington, D.C.: National 
Science Foundation. 
Coleman, E. B. 1966. “Learning of prose written in four grammatical 
transformations.” Journal of applied psychology 49:332-341. 
Coleman, E. B. 1971. “Developing a technology of written instruction: some 
determiners of the complexity of prose.” In Verbal learning research 
and the technology of written instruction, eds. E. Z. Rothkopf and P. E. 
Johnson. New York: Teachers College Press, Columbia University, pp. 
155-204.

The Principles of Readability 
Copyright © 2004 William H. DuBay Page 61 
Coleman, E. B. and P. J. Blumenfeld. 1963 “Cloze scores of nominalization and 
their grammatical transformations using active verbs.” Psychology 
reports 13:651-654. 
Connaster, B. F. 1999. “Last rites for readability formulas in technical 
communication.” Journal of technical writing and communication. 29, 
no. 3:271-287. 
Coupland, N. 1978. “Is readability real?” Communication of scientific and 
technical information. April:15-17. 
Courtis, J. K. 1987. “Fry, Smox, Lix and Rix: Insinuations about corporate 
business communications.” Journal of business communications. 24, 
no. 2:19-27. 
Dale, E. 1967. Can you give the public what it wants? New York: World Book 
Encyclopedia.  
Dale, E. and R. W. Tyler. 1934. “A study of the factors influencing the difficulty 
of reading materials for adults of limited reading ability.” Library 
Quarterly 4:384-412. 
Dale, E. and J. S. Chall. 1948. “A formula for predicting readability.” 
Educational research bulletin Jan. 21 and Feb. 17, 27:1-20, 37-54. 
Dale, E. and J. S. Chall. 1949. “The concept of readability.” Elementary English 
26: 23.  
Dale, E. and J. O’Rourke. 1981. The living word vocabulary: A national 
vocabulary Inventory. Chicago: World Book–Childcraft International. 
Davison, A. 1984. “Readability formulas and comprehension.” In 
Comprehension instruction: Perspectives and suggestions, eds. G. G. 
Duffy, L. R. Roehler, and J. Mason. New York: Longman. 
Davison, A. 1986. Readability: The situation today. Reading education report 
No. 70. Champaign, IL: Center for the Study of Reading. University of 
Illinois at Urbana-Champaign. 
Department of the Air Force. 1977. Publications management: Writing 
understandable publications (HQ Operating Instruction 5-2). 
Washington, DC: Headquarters U.S. Air Force. 25 March.  
Department of Defense. 1978. Manuals, technical: General style and format 
requirements. Military Specification MIL-M-3784A (Amendment 5), 
24 July. 
Dickinson, T. 1987. Exploring the night sky. Ontario, Canada: Camden East. 
Doak, C. C., L. G. Doak, and J. H. Root. 1996. Teaching patients with low 
literacy skills. Philadelphia: J. B. Lippincott Company. 
Dolch, E. W. 1939. “Fact burden and reading difficulty.” Elementary English 
review 16:135-138. 
Decina, L. E. and K. Y. Knoebel. 1997. "Child safety seat misuse patterns in 
four states." Accident analysis and prevention 29: 125-132. 
Duffy, T. M. 1985. “Readability formulas: What’s the use?” In Designing usable 
texts, eds. T. M. Duffy and R. M. Waller. New York: Academic Press, 
pp. 113-143. 
Duffy, T. M. and P. Kabance. 1981. “Testing a readable writing approach to text 
revision.” Journal of educational psychology 74, no. 5:733-748.  
Dumas, J. and J. Redish. 1999. A practical guide to usability testing. Exeter UK: 
Intellect.

The Principles of Readability 
Copyright © 2004 William H. DuBay Page 62 
Elwork, A., B. Sales, and J. Alfini. 1982.  Making jury instructions 
understandable. Charlottesville, VA: Michie Company. 
Endres, J., J. Montgomery, and P. Welch. “Lead poison prevention: A 
comparative review of brochures.” Journal of environmental health 64, 
no. 6:20-25. 
Entin, E. B. and G. R. Klare 1985. “Relationships of measures of interest, prior 
knowledge, and readability to comprehension of expository passages.” 
Advances in reading/language research 3:9-38. 
Ewing, M. J. 1976. A comparison of the effects of readability and time on 
learning the contents of a state driver’s handbook. Unpublished 
doctoral dissertation, Florida State University. 
Fang, I. E. 1966-1967. “The ‘easy listening formula.’” The journal of 
broadcasting 11:63-68. 
Farr, J. N., J. J. Jenkins, and D. G. Paterson. 1951. “Simplification of the Flesch 
Reading Ease Formula.” Journal of applied psychology 35, no. 5:333-
357. 
Fass, W. and G. M. Schumacher. 1978. “Effects of motivation, subject activity, 
and readability on the retention of prose materials.” Journal of 
educational psychology 70:803-808. 
Faufmann, W. J., III. 1990. Discovering the universe, 2nd Ed. New York: W. H. 
Freeman. 
Feld. B., Jr. 1948. “Empirical test proves clarity adds readers.” Editor and 
publisher 81:38.  
Felker, D. B., F. Pickering, V. R. Charrow, V. M. Holland, and J. C. Redish. 
1981. Guidelines for document designers. Washington, DC: American 
Institutes for Research.  
Fishburne, R. P. 1976 Readability and reading ability as predictors of 
comprehension and learning time in a computer managed instructional 
system. Doctoral dissertation, College of Education, Memphis State 
University. 
Flesch, R. 1943. “Marks of a readable style.” Columbia University contributions 
to education, no. 897. New York: Bureau of Publications, Teachers 
College, Columbia University. 
Flesch, R. 1946. The art of plain talk. New York: Harper. 
Flesch, R. 1948. “A new readability yardstick.” Journal of Applied Psychology 
32:221-233. 
Flesch, R. 1949 and 1974. The art of readable writing. New York: Harper. 
Flesch, R. 1951. The art of clear thinking. New York: Harper. 
Flesch, R. 1955. Why Johnny can’t read—And what you can do about it . New 
York: Harper. 
Flesch, R. 1964. The ABC of style: A guide to plain English. New York: Harper. 
Flesch, R. 1979. How to write in plain English: A book for lawyers and 
consumers. New York: Harper.  
Fountas, I.C., and G. S. Pinnell. 1999. Matching books to readers: Using leveled 
books in guided reading. Portsmouth, NH: Heinemann. 
Freebody, P. and R. C Anderson. 1983. “Effects of vocabulary difficulty, text 
cohesion, and schema availability on reading comprehension.” Reading 
research quarterly 18: 277-294.

The Principles of Readability 
Copyright © 2004 William H. DuBay Page 63 
Fry, E. B. 1963. Teaching faster reading. London: Cambridge University Press. 
Fry, E. B. 1968. “A readability formula that saves time.” Journal of reading 
11:513-516. 
Fry, E. B. 1969. “The readability graph validated at primary levels.” The reading 
teacher. 22:534-538. 
Fry, E. B. 1977. “Fry’s readability graph: Clarifications, validity, and extension 
to level 17.” Journal of Reading 21, no. 3:242-252.  
Fry, E. B. 1986. Varied uses of readability measurement. Paper presented at the 
31st Annual Meeting of the International Reading Association, 
Philadelphia, PA.  
Fry, E. B. 1988. “Writeability: the principles of writing for increased 
comprehension.” In Readability: Its past, present, and future, eds. B. L 
Sakaluk and S. J. Samuels. Newark, DE: International Reading 
Association.  
Fry, E. B. 1989a. The legal aspects of readability. Paper presented at the 34th 
Annual Meeting of the International Reading Association, New 
Orleans. 
Fry, E. B. 1989b. “Reading formulas: maligned but valid.” Journal of reading 
32, no. 4:292-297. 
Fry, E. B. 2002. “Readability versus leveling.”  Reading Teacher 56, no. 3:286-
292. 
Fry, E.B., J. E. Kress, and D. L. Fountoukidis. 1993. The reading teacher’s book 
of lists: Third edition. West Nyack, NY: The Center for Applied 
Research in Education.  
Gates, A. I. 1930. Interest and ability in reading.  New York: Macmillan. 
Gilliland, J. 1972. Readability. London: Hodder and Stoughton. 
Gough, P. B. 1965. “Grammatical transformations and the speed of 
understanding.” Journal of verbal learning and verbal behavior  4:107-
111. 
Graber, M. A., D. M. D’Alessandro, and J. Johnson-West. 2002. “Reading level 
of privacy policies on internet health web sites.” Journal of Family 
Practice 51, no. 7:642-647. 
Gray, W. S. and B. Leary. 1935. What makes a book readable. Chicago: 
Chicago University Press. 
Green. M. T. 1979. Effects of readability and directed stopping on the learning 
and enjoyment of technical materials. Unpublished doctoral 
dissertation, University of South Carolina.  
Gunning, R. 1952. The technique of clear writing, New York: McGraw-Hill. 
Hackos, J. and J. Redish 1998. User and task analysis for interface design. New 
York: Wiley. 
Hackos, J. and D. M. Stevens. 1997. Standards for online communication. New 
York: Wiley. 
Halliday, M. and R. Hasan 1976. Cohesion in English. London: Longman. 
Halbert, M. G. 1944. “The teaching value of illustrated books.” American school 
board journal 108, no. 5:43-44. 
Hardyck, C. D. and L. F. Petrinovich 1970. “Subvocal speech and 
comprehension level as a function of the difficulty level of reading 
material.” Journal of verbal leaning and verbal behavior  9:647-652.

The Principles of Readability 
Copyright © 2004 William H. DuBay Page 64 
Hargis, G., A. K. Hernandez, P. Hughes, J. Ramaker, S. Rouiller, and E. Wilde. 
1998. Developing quality technical information: A handbook for 
writers and editors. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall. 
Hargis, G. 2000. “Readability and computer documentation.” ACM journal of 
computer documentation 24, no. 3:122-131. 
Harris, A. J. and M. D. Jacobson. 1973. The Harris-Jacobson primary 
readability formulas. Paper presented at the Annual Meeting of the 
International Reading Association, Denver, CO.  
Harvey, H. D. and P. Fleming. 2003. “The readability and audience acceptance 
of printed health promotion materials used by environmental health 
departments.” Journal of environmental health. 65, no. 6:22-29. 
Hochhauser, M. 2002. “The effects of HIPAA on research consent forms.” 
Patient care management 17, no. 5:6-7. 
Hooke, L. R. et al. 1979. Readability of Air Force publications: A criterion 
referenced evaluation. Final Report. AFHRL-TR-79-21. Washington, 
D.C.: U. S. Air Force. Eric No: ED177512.  
Horn, E. 1937. Methods of instruction in the social studies. New York: Charles 
Scribner’s and Sons. (Report of the Commission on Social Studies, 
American Historical Association). 
Hornby, P. A. 1974. “Surface structure and presupposition.” Journal of verbal 
learning and verbal behavior 13:530-538. 
Huckin, T. N., E. H. Curin, and D. Graham. 1991. “Prescriptive linguistics and 
plain English: The case of “whiz-deletions.” In Plain language: 
Principles and practice, ed. E. Steinberg. Detroit: Wayne State 
University Press.  
Hull, L. C. 1979. “Measuring the readability of technical writing.” Proceedings 
of the 26th International Technical Communications Conference, Los 
Angeles: E79 to E84. 
Hunt, K. 1965. Grammatical structures written at three grade levels. National 
council of Teachers of English Report No. 3. Urbana, IL: National 
Council of Teachers of English. 
Johnson, W. 1946. People in Quandaries. New York: Harpers, Appendix. 
Johnston, C., F. P. Rivara, and R. Soderberg. 1994. "Children in Car Crashes: 
Analysis of Data for Injury and Use of Restraints." Pediatrics 93, no. 6 
pt 1: 960-965. 
Kahane, C. 1986. An evaluation of child passenger safety: the effectiveness and 
benefits of safety seats. Washington, D. C.: National Highway Traffic 
Safety Administration. 
Kemper, S. 1983. “Measuring the inference load of a text.” Journal of 
educational psychology. 75:3, 391-401. 
Kern, R. P. 1979. “Usefulness of readability formulas for achieving Army 
readability objectives: Research and state-of-the-art applied to the 
Army’s problem. Fort Benjamin Harrison, ID: Technical Advisory 
Service, U.S. Army Research Institute. (NTIS No. AD A086 408/2). 
Kincaid, J. P., J. A. Aagard, J. W. O’Hara, and L. K. Cottrell. 1981. “Computer 
readability editing system.” IEEE transactions on professional 
communications March.  
Kincaid, J. P., R. P. Fishburne, R. L. Rogers, and B. S. Chissom. 1975. 
Derivation of new readability formulas (Automated Readability Index,

The Principles of Readability 
Copyright © 2004 William H. DuBay Page 65 
Fog Count and Flesch Reading Ease Formula) for Navy enlisted 
personnel. CNTECHTRA Research Branch Report 8-75.  
King, M. M., A. S. W. Winton, and A. D. Adkins. 2003. “Assessing the 
readability of mental health internet brochures for children and 
adolescents.” Journal of child and family studies 12, no. 1:91-100. 
Kintsch, W. and E. Vipond. 1979. “Reading comprehension and readability in 
educational practice and psychological theory.” In Perspectives on 
memory research, ed. L. G. Nilsson. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum. 
Kintsch, W. and J. R  Miller. 1981. “Readability: A view from cognitive 
psychology.” In Teaching: Research reviews. Neward, DE: 
International Reading Association. 
Kitson, H. D. 1921. The mind of the buyer. New York: Macmillan. 
Klare, G. R. 1952. “Measures of the readability of written communication: An 
evaluation.” The journal of educational Psychology 43, no. 7:385-399.  
Klare, G. R. 1957. “The relationship of typographic arrangement to the learning 
of technical training material.” Journal of applied psychology 41, no. 
1:41-45. 
Klare, G. R. 1963. The measurement of readability. Ames, Iowa: Iowa State 
University Press. 
Klare, G. R. 1968. “The role of word frequency in readability.” Elementary 
English, 45:12-22. 
Klare, G. R. 1974-75. “Assessing readability.” Reading research quarterly 10: 
62-102. 
Klare, G. R. 1975. A manual for readable writing. Glen Burnie, MD: REMco. 
(revised 1980). 
Klare, G. R. 1976. “A second look at the validity of the readability formulas.” 
Journal of reading behavior 8:159-152. 
Klare, G. R. 1977. “Readable technical writing: Some observations.” Technical 
communication 24, no. 2:1-5. 
Klare, G. R. 1980. How to write readable English. London: Hutchinson. 
Klare, G. R. 1981. “Readability indices: do they inform or misinform?” 
Information design journal 2:251-255. 
Klare, G. R. 1982. “Readability.” Encyclopedia of educational research 3:1520-
1531. New York: The Free Press. 
Klare, G. R. 1984. “Readability.” Handbook of reading research, ed. P. D. 
Pearson. New York: Longman, pp. 681-744. 
Klare, G. R. 1985. “Matching reading materials to readers: The role of 
readability estimates in conjunction with other information about 
comprehensibility.” In Reading, thinking, and concept development, 
eds. T. L. Harris and E. J. Cooper. New York: College Entrance 
Examination Board.   
Klare, G. R. 2000. “Readable computer documentation.” ACM journal of 
computer documentation 24, no. 3:148-168.  
Klare, G. R. and B. Buck, 1954. Know your reader, the scientific approach to 
readability. New York: Hermitage House. 
Klare, G. R., J. E. Mabry, and L. M. Gustafson. 1955a. “The relationship of style 
difficulty to immediate retention and to acceptability of technical 
material.” Journal of educational psychology 46:287-295.

The Principles of Readability 
Copyright © 2004 William H. DuBay Page 66 
Klare, G. R., J. E. Mabry, and L. M. Gustafson. 1955b. “The relationship of 
patterning (underlining) to immediate retention and to acceptability of 
technical material.” Journal of applied psychology 39, no. 1:40-42. 
Klare, G. R., J. E. Mabry, and L. M. Gustafson. 1955c. “The relationship of 
immediate retention of technical training material to career preferences 
and aptitudes” Journal of educational psychology 46, no. 6:321-329. 
Klare, G. R., E. H. Shuford, and W. H. Nichols. 1957. “The relationship of style 
difficulty, practice, and ability to efficiency of reading and retention.” 
Journal of applied psychology 41:222-226. 
Klare, G. R., P. P. Rowe, M. G. St. John, and L. M. Stolurow. 1969. 
“Automation of the Flesch reading ease readability formula, with 
various options.” Reading research quarterly 4, no. 4:550-559. 
Klare, G. R. and K. L. Smart. 1973. “Analysis of the readability level of selected 
USAFI instructional materials.” The journal of educational research 
67:176. 
Knight, D. and J. D. Alcorn. 1969. “Comparisons of the performance of 
educationally disadvantaged adults and elementary children on selected 
measures of reading performance.” The nineteenth yearbook of the 
National Reading Conference. Milwaukee, WI: Marquette University.  
Knuth, R. A. and B.F. Jones. 1991. What does research say about reading. Oak 
Brook, IL: North Central Reading Educational Laboratory. 
http://www.ncrel.org/sdrs/areas/stw_esys/str_read.htm  
Koslin, B. I., S. Zeno, and S. Koslin. 1987. The DRP: An effective measure in 
reading. New York: College Entrance Examination Board. 
Lane, W. G., G. C. Liu and E. Newlin. 2000. "The Association between hands-
on instruction and proper child safety seat installation." Pediatrics 2, 
no. 4: 924-929. 
Lange, R. 1982. “Readability formulas: Second looks, second thoughts.” 
Reading Teacher 35:858-861. 
Lewerenz, A. S. 1929. “Measurement of difficulty of reading materials.” Los 
Angeles Educational Research Bulletin 8:11-16. 
Lewerenz, A. S. 1929a. “Objective measurement of the difficulty of reading 
materials.” Los Angeles Educational Research Bulletin 9:8-11. 
Lewerenz, A. S. 1935. “A vocabulary grade placement formula.” Journal of 
Experimental Education 3:236. 
Lewerenz, A. S.  1939. “Selection of reading materials by pupil ability and 
interest.”  Elementary English Review 16:151-156. 
Lively, B. A. and S. L. Pressey. 1923. “A method for measuring the ‘vocabulary 
burden’ of textbooks. Educational administration and supervision 
9:389-398. 
Lorge, I. 1938. The semantic count of the 570 commonest English words. New 
York: Bureau of Publications, Teachers College, Columbia University. 
Lorge, I. 1939. “Predicting reading difficulty of selections for children.” 
Elementary English Review 16:229-233. 
McCall, W. A. and L. M. Crabbs. 1926, 1950, 1961, 1979. Standard Test 
Lessons in Reading. New York: Teachers College, Columbia University 
Press.

The Principles of Readability 
Copyright © 2004 William H. DuBay Page 67 
Macdonald, N. H., L. T. Frase, P. S. Gingrich, and S. A. Keenan. 1982. “The 
writer’s workbench: Computer aids for text analysis.” Educational 
psychologist 17:172-179.  
MacGinitie, W. and R. Tretiak. 1971. “Sentence depth measures as predictors of 
reading difficulty.” Reading research quarterly 6:364-376. 
McLaughlin, G. H. 1968. “Proposals for British readability measures.” Third 
international reading symposium eds. Brown and Downing. London: 
Cassell.   
McLaughlin, G. H. 1969. “SMOG grading - a new readability formula,” Journal 
of reading 22:639-646. 
McLean, J. I. 1985. Formative evaluation of the comprehensibility of written 
instruction. Paper presented at the 36th Annual Meeting of the 
Conference on College Composition and Communication, Minneapolis, 
MN.  
Manzo, A. 1970.  “Readability: A postscript.” Elementary English 47:962-965. 
Markel, M. et al. 1992. “Effects of paragraph length on attitudes toward 
technical writing.” Technical communication 39, no. 3:454-456. 
Massad, C. E. 1977. The role of decoding skills in adult functional reading. 
Paper presented at the Annual Meeting of the American Educational 
Association, New York, April.   
Mathew, J. 2002. “Readability of consent forms in schizophrenia research.” 
Australian and New Zealand journal of psychiatry 36, no. 4:564-566. 
Maxwell, M. 1978. “Readability: Have we gone too far?” Journal of reading 
21:525-530.   
Meyer, B. J. F. 1982. “Reading research and the composition teacher: The 
importance of plans.” College composition and communication 33, no. 
1:37-49. 
Miller, G. R. and E. B. Coleman. 1967. “A set of thirty-six prose passages 
calibrated for complexity.”  Journal of verbal learning and verbal 
behavior 6:851-854. 
Morriss, E. C. and D. Holversen. 1938. “Idea analysis technique.” Unpublished 
manuscript. New York: Teachers College, Columbia University. In J. S. 
Chall. 1958.  
Murphy, D. 1947. “How plain talk increases readership 45% to 60%.” Printer’s 
ink 220:35-37. 
National Academy on an Aging Society. 2002. “Health literacy fact sheet.” 
Accessed 12/06/02: http://www.agingsociety.org/healthlit.htm  
National Assessment of Educational Progress (NAEP). 1985. The Reading 
Report Card. Princeton, NY: Educational Testing Service. 
National Center for Education Statistics. 1993. Adult literacy in America. 
Washington, D. C.: U.S. Dept. of Education. 
http://www.nald.ca/fulltext/Report2/rep15-01.htm 
National Center for Education Statistics. 1999. Literacy in the work force. 
Washington, D.C.: U.S. Dept. of Education. 
http://nces.ed.gov/pubs99/1999470.pdf  
National Center for Education Statistics. 2001. Adult literacy and education in 
America: Four studies based on the adult literacy survey. Washington, 
D. C.: U.S. Dept. of Education. 
http://nces.ed.gov/pubs2001/2001534.pdf

The Principles of Readability 
Copyright © 2004 William H. DuBay Page 68 
National Center for Health Statistics. 2000. National Mortality Data, 1998. 
Hyattsville, MD: NCHS. 
National Highway Traffic Safety Administration. 1996. Observed Patterns of 
Misuse of Child Safety Seats. Washington, D. C.: NHTSA. 
Oermann, M. H. and F. E. Wilson. 2000. “Quality of health care information for 
consumers on the internet.” Journal of nursing care quality 14, no. 
4:45-55. 
Ojemann, R. 1934. “The reading ability of parents and factors associated with 
the reading difficulty of parent education materials.” In Researchers in 
parent education II. 19. (University of Iowa Studies, Studies in Child 
Welfare, VIII), ed. G. D. Stoddard. Iowa City, IA: University of Iowa. 
Olsen, L. A. and R. Johnson. 1989. “Towards a better measure of readability: 
Explanation of empirical performance results.” Proceedings of the 36th 
International Technical Communication Conference. Washington, 
D.C.: Society of Technical Communication. 
Omaggio, A. C. 1979. Pictures and reading: Some research results. Paper 
presented at the Central States Conference on the Teaching of Foreign 
Languages. Minneapolis, MN, April 19-20, 1979. 
Paasche-Orlow, M. K., H. A. Taylor, and F. L. Brancati. 2003. “Readability 
standards for informed-consent forms as compared with actual 
readability.” New England journal of medicine 248, no. 8:721-727. 
Patty, W. W. and W. I. Painter. 1931. “A technique for measuring the 
vocabulary burden of textbooks. Journal of educational research 
24:127-134. 
Paul, T. 2003. Guided Independent Reading. Madison, WI: School Renaissance 
Institute. http://www.renlearn.com/GIRP2008.pdf 
Payne, S., S. Large, N. Jarrett, and P. Turner. 2000. “Written information given 
to patients and families by palliative care units: A national survey.” 
Lancet 355, no. 9217:1792. 
Pearson, P. D., J. Hansen, and C. Gordon. 1979. “The effect of background 
knowledge on young children’s comprehension of explicit and implicit 
information.” Journal of reading behavior 11:201-209.  
Powers, R. D., W. A. Sumner, and B. E. Kearl. 1958. “A recalculation of four 
readability formulas.” Journalism quarterly 49:99-105. 
Rabin, A. T. 1988. “Determining difficulty levels of text written in languages 
other than English.” In Readability: Its past, present, and future, eds. B. 
L. Zakaluk and S. J. Samuels. Newark, DE: International Reading 
Association. 
Redish, J. C. 1988.”Reading to learn to do.” The technical writing teacher. 15, 
no. 3:323-333.  
Redish, J. C. 2000. “Readability formulas have even more limitations than Klare 
discusses.” ACM journal of computer documentation 24, no. 3:132-
137. 
Redish, J. C. and J. Selzer. 1985. “The place of readability formulas in technical 
communication.” Technical communication 32, no. 4:46-52. 
Richards, B. 1984. “Availability of prior knowledge and its effects on transfer of 
learning.” Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Association for 
Education Communications and Technology, Dallas, TX, Jan. 20-24.

The Principles of Readability 
Copyright © 2004 William H. DuBay Page 69 
Rogers, J. R. 1962. “A formula for predicting the comprehension level of 
material to be presented orally.” The journal of educational research 
56:218-220.  
Rothkopf, E. Z. 1972. “Structural text features and the control of processes in 
learning written materials,” In Language comprehension and the 
acquisition of knowledge, eds. R.O. Freedle and J. B. Carroll. 
Washington, DC: Winston. 
Rothkopf, E. Z. 1977. “Text difficulty predicted from functional chaining in 
short term memory.” Abstracts of papers and symposia. American 
Educational Research Association annual meeting, Washington, D.C. 
Rumelhart, D. E. 1984. “Understanding understanding.” In Understanding 
reading comprehension: cognition, language, and the structure of 
prose, ed. J. Flood. Newark, DE: International Reading Association.  
Russell, S. N. 1973. “Error pattern relationship of developmental readers and 
functionally illiterate adults.” Ed.D. dissertation. Oklahoma State 
University.  
School Renaissance Institute. 1999. ZPD guidelines: Helping students achieve 
optimum reading growth. Madison, WI: School Renaissance Institute, 
Inc. 
School Renaissance Institute. 2000. The ATOS readability formula for books 
and how it compares to other formulas. Madison, WI: School 
Renaissance Institute, Inc.   
Schramm, W. 1947. “Measuring another dimension of newspaper readership.” 
Journalism quarterly 24:293-306. 
Schriver, K. 1991. “Plain language through protocol-aided revision.” In Plain 
Language: Principles and practice, ed. E. R. Steinberg. Detroit: Wayne 
State University Press. 
Schriver, K. 1997. Dynamics in document design. New York: Wiley. 
Schriver, K. 2000. “Readability formulas in the new millennium: What’s the 
use?” ACM journal of computer documentation 24, no. 3:138-140. 
Selzer, Jack. 1981. “Readability is a four-letter word.” Journal of business 
communication 18, no. 4:23-34. 
Sherman, A. L. 1893. Analytics of literature: A manual for the objective study of 
English prose and poetry. Boston: Ginn & Co. 
Singer, H. 1975. “The SEER technique: A non-computational procedure for 
quickly estimating readability levels.” Journal of reading behavior 
3:255-267.  
Smith, E. A. and J. P. Kincaid. 1970. “Derivation and validation of the 
automated readability index for use with technical materials.” Human 
factors 12:457-464. 
Smith, E. A. and R. J. Senter. 1967.  Automated readability index. AMRL-TR-
66-22. Wright-Patterson AFB, OH: Aerospace Medical Division.  
Spache, G. 1953. “A new readability formula for primary-grade reading 
materials.” Elementary school journal. 53:410-413.  
Spilich, G. J., G. T. Vesonder, H. L. Chiesi, and J. F. Voss. 1979. “Text 
processing of domain-related information for individuals of high and 
low domain knowledge. Journal of verbal learning and verbal behavior  
18: 275-290.

The Principles of Readability 
Copyright © 2004 William H. DuBay Page 70 
Spyridakis, J. H. 1989. “Signaling effects: A review of the research-Part 1.” 
Journal of technical writing and communication. 19, no. 3:227-240. 
Spyridakis, J. H. 1989a. “Signaling effects: Increased content retention and new 
answers-Part 2.” Journal of technical writing and communication. 19, 
no. 4:395-415. 
Squires, P. and Ross, R. G. 1990. Literacy requirements for customer service 
jobs. Paper presented at the Annual Convention of the American 
Psychological Association, Boston, MA. 
Stahl, N. A. and W. A. Henk. 1995. “Are drivers manuals understandable?” 
Transportation quarterly 49, no. 1:105-116. 
Stanovich, K. E. 1984. “Word recognition: changing perspectives.” In R. Barr, 
M. Kamil, P. B. Mosenthal, and P.D. Pearson, eds. Handbook of 
reading research: Volume II. New York: Longman.  
Stenner, A. J. and D. S. Burdick. The objective measurement of reading 
comprehension in response to technical questions raised by the 
California department of education technical study group . Durham, 
NC: MetaMetrics, Inc. 
Stenner, A. J., I. Horabin, D. R. Smith, and R. Smith. 1988a. The Lexile 
Framework. Durham, NC: Metametrics, Inc. 
Stenner, A. J., I. Horabin, D. R. Smith, and R. Smith. 1988b. “Most 
comprehension tests do measure reading comprehension: A response to 
McLean and Goldstein.” Phi Delta Kappa: 765-767. 
Sticht, T. G. 1982. Evaluation of the “Reading potential” concept for 
marginally literate adults: Technical report 82-2.  Washington, DC: 
Human Resources Research Organization. 
Sticht, T. G. 1995. The military experience and workplace literacy: A review 
and synthesis for policy and practice. NCAL Technical Report TR94-
01. http://www.literacyonline.org/products/ncal/pdf/TR9401.pdf 
Sticht, T. G. and A. B. Armstrong. 1994. Adult literacy in the United States: A 
compendium of quantitative data and interpretive comment.  
http://www.nald.ca/fulltext/adlitUS/cover.htm. 
Sticht, T. G., L. J. Beck, R. N. Hauke, G. M. Kleinman, and J. H. James. 1974. 
Auding and reading. Alexandria, VA: Human Resources Research 
Organization. 
Swanson, C. C. 1979. Readability and top-level structure: Effects on reading 
comprehension. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, Arizona State 
University.  
Swanson, C. E. 1948. “Readability and readership: A controlled experiment.” 
Journalism quarterly 25:339-343. 
Taylor, W. 1953. “Cloze procedure: A new tool for measuring readability.” 
Journalism quarterly 30:415-433. 
Thorndike, E. L. 1916. “An improved scale for measuring ability in reading.” 
Teachers college record 17:40-67. 
Thorndike, E. L. 1921. The teacher’s word book. New York: Bureau of 
Publications, Teachers College, Columbia University. 
Thorndike, E. L. 1932. A teacher’s word book of 20,000 words. New York:  
Bureau of Publications, Teachers College, Columbia University.

The Principles of Readability 
Copyright © 2004 William H. DuBay Page 71 
Thorndike, E. L. and I. Lorge. 1944. The teacher’s word book of 30,000 words. 
New York: Bureau of Publications, Teachers College, Columbia 
University.  
Thorndike, R. L. 1973-1974. “Reading as reasoning.” Reading research 
quarterly 9:135-137. 
Ulijn, J. M. and J. B. Strother. 1990. “The effect of syntactic simplification on 
reading EST texts as L1 and L2.” Journal of research in reading 13, 
no. 1:38-54.  
Venezky, R. L. 1984. “The history of reading research.” Handbook of Reading 
Research, ed. P. David Pearson. New York: Longmann. 
Vernon, M. D. 1946. “Learning from graphic material.” British journal of 
psychology 36:145-158. 
Vogel, M. and C. Washburne. 1928. “An objective method of determining grade 
placement of children’s reading material.” Elementary school journal, 
28:373-381. 
Vygotsky, L. 1978. Mind in Society. M. Cole, V. John-Steiner, S. Scribner, and 
E. Souberman, eds. and trans. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University 
Press. 
Waples, D. and R. W. Tyler. 1931. What people want to read about. Chicago: 
University of Chicago Press.  
Weeks, W. B. and A. E. Wallace. 2002. “Readability of British and American 
medical prose at the start of the 21st century.” British medical journal 
325, no. 7378:1451-1453. 
Wegner, M. and D. Girasek. 2003. “How readable are child safety seat 
installation instructions?” Pediatrics 111:588-591. 
Weiss, B. D. and C. Coyne. 1997. Communicating with patients who cannot 
read. New England journal of medicine 337, no. 4: 272-274. 
Williams, A. R., A. L. Siegel, J. R. Burkett, and S. D. Groff. 1977. Development 
and evaluation of an equation for predicting the comprehensibility of 
textual material. AFHRL-TB-77-8. Brooks AFB, TX: Air Force 
Human Resources Laboratory, Air Force Systems Command. 
Williams, B. F., J. K. French, and H. D. White. 2003. “Informed consent during 
the clinical emergency of acute myocardial infarction (HERO-2 consent 
substudy): a prospective observational study.” Lancet 361 no. 
9361:918-923. 
Woern, Y. 1977. “On the relationship between knowledge of the world and 
comprehension of texts: Assimilation and accommodation effects 
related to belief structures.” Scandinavian journal of psychology, 18: 
130-139. 
Wyler, R. 1989. The starry sky: An outdoor science book. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: 
Julian Messner (Prentice Hall). 
Yngve, V. H. 1960. “A model and hypothesis for language structure.” 
Proceedings of the American Philosophical Association  404:444-466.  
Zeller, D. 1941. The relative importance of factors of interest in reading 
materials for junior high school pupils. New York: Bureau of 
Publications, Teachers College, Columbia University.  
Zeno, S. M., S. H. Ivens, R. T. Millard, and R. Duvvuri. 1995. The educator’s 
word frequency guide. Brewster, NY: Touchstone Applied Science 
Associates.

The Principles of Readability 
Copyright © 2004 William H. DuBay Page 72 
Zingman, D. E. S. 1977. Readability and mass political literature: The 1976 
presidential election Campaign. M.Ed. Thesis, Rutgers, The State 
University of New Jersey. 
Zipf, G. K. 1949. Human behavior and the principle of least effort: An 
introduction to human ecology. New York: Addison-Wesley (revised 
1965). 
Cloze Answers  .  
The potential for two-way communication is very strong on the Web. As a 
result, many companies are focused on the Web’s marketing potential. 
From a marketing point of view, today’s virtual worlds can attract the 
curious Web explorers, and interactive database engines can measure and 
track a visitor’s every response. 
Biosketch 
William H. DuBay worked as a technical communicator in several California 
firms for 15 years. He is a Senior Member of Orange County chapter of the 
Society for Technical Communications and contributes frequently to its 
publications. He serves on the Advisory Board of the Technical and Professional 
Communication Certificate Program of California State University, Long Beach. 
He also belongs to the Plain Language Association International. Currently, he 
works as a readability consultant. His email address is bdubay@sbcglobal.net  
The author wishes to thank George Klare for his guidance and help in the 
development of this article.