##### PDF page 1, whole page (x 0-648 pt) #####
This article was downloaded by: [Michigan State University]
On: 28 February 2015, At: 01:41
Publisher: Taylor & Francis
Informa Ltd Registered in England and Wales Registered Number: 1072954 Registered office: Mortimer House, 37-41
Mortimer Street, London W1T 3JH, UK



                                 Journal of the American Statistical Association
                                 Publication details, including instructions for authors and subscription information:
                                 http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/uasa20

                                 Graphical Perception: Theory, Experimentation, and
                                 Application to the Development of Graphical Methods
                                                      a                 a
                                 William S. Cleveland & Robert McGill
                                 a
                                  AT&T Bell Laboratories , Murray Hill , NJ , 07974 , USA
                                 Published online: 12 Mar 2012.




To cite this article: William S. Cleveland & Robert McGill (1984) Graphical Perception: Theory, Experimentation, and Application to
the Development of Graphical Methods, Journal of the American Statistical Association, 79:387, 531-554

To link to this article: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/01621459.1984.10478080



PLEASE SCROLL DOWN FOR ARTICLE

Taylor & Francis makes every effort to ensure the accuracy of all the information (the “Content”) contained in the
publications on our platform. However, Taylor & Francis, our agents, and our licensors make no representations or
warranties whatsoever as to the accuracy, completeness, or suitability for any purpose of the Content. Any opinions
and views expressed in this publication are the opinions and views of the authors, and are not the views of or endorsed
by Taylor & Francis. The accuracy of the Content should not be relied upon and should be independently verified with
primary sources of information. Taylor and Francis shall not be liable for any losses, actions, claims, proceedings,
demands, costs, expenses, damages, and other liabilities whatsoever or howsoever caused arising directly or indirectly
in connection with, in relation to or arising out of the use of the Content.

This article may be used for research, teaching, and private study purposes. Any substantial or systematic
reproduction, redistribution, reselling, loan, sub-licensing, systematic supply, or distribution in any form to anyone is
expressly forbidden. Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http://www.tandfonline.com/page/terms-
and-conditions

##### PDF page 2, left column (x 0-329 pt) #####
                                                                                 Graphical Perception
                                                                                       and Applicati

                                                                      WILLIAM S. CLEVELAND and ROBERT McGILL*




                                                                      The subject of graphical methods for data analysis and
                                                                      for data presentation needs a scientific foundation. In this
                                                                      article we take a few steps in the direction of establishing
                                                                      such a foundation. Our approach is based on graphical
                                                                      perception-the visual decoding of information encoded
                                                                      on graphs-and it includes both theory and experimen-
                                                                      tation to test the theory. The theory deals with a small
                                                                      but important piece of the whole process of graphical
                                                                      perception. The first part is an identification of a set of
                                                                      elementary perceptual tasks that are carried out when
Downloaded by [Michigan State University] at 01:41 28 February 2015




                                                                      people extract quantitative information from graphs. The
                                                                      second part is an ordering of the tasks on the basis of
                                                                      how accurately people perform them. Elements of the
                                                                      theory are tested by experimentation in which subjects
                                                                      record their judgments of the quantitative information on
                                                                      graphs. The experiments validate these elements but also
                                                                       suggest that the set of elementary tasks should be ex-
                                                                      panded. The theory provides a guideline for graph con-
                                                                       struction: Graphs should employ elementary tasks as high
                                                                      in the ordering as possible. This principle is applied to a
                                                                       variety of graphs, including bar charts, divided barcharts,
                                                                      pie charts, and statistical maps with shading. The con-
                                                                      clusion is that radical surgery on these popular graphs is
                                                                       needed, and as replacements we offer alternative graph-
                                                                       ical forms-dot charts, dot charts with grouping, and
                                                                      framed-rectangle charts.
                                                                      KEY WORDS: Computer graphics; Psychophysics.
                                                                                            1. INTRODUCTION
                                                                        Nearly 200 years ago William Playfair (1786) began the
                                                                      serious use of graphs for looking at data. More than 50
                                                                      years ago a battle raged on the pages of the Journal of
                                                                      the American Statistical Association about the relative
                                                                      merits of bar charts and pie charts (Eells 1926; Croxton
                                                                      1927; Croxton and Stryker 1927; von Huhn 1927). Today
                                                                      graphs are a vital part of statistical data analysis and a
                                                                      vital part of communication in science and technology,
                                                                      business, education, and the mass media.
                                                                         Still, graph design for data analysis and presentation is


                                                                        * William S. Cleveland and Robert McGill are statisticians at AT&T
                                                                      Bell Laboratories, Murray Hill, NJ 07974. The authors are indebted to
                                                                      John Chambers, Ram Gnanadesikan, David Krantz, William Kruskal,
                                                                      Colin Mallows, Frederick Mosteller, Henry Pollak, PaulTukey, and the
                                                                      JASA reviewers for important comments on an earlier version of this
                                                                      article.

                                                                                                                                          5

##### PDF page 2, right column (x 329-648 pt) #####
n: Theory, Experimentation,
ion to the Development of
       Graphical Methods


  largely unscientific. This is why Cox (1978) argued,
  “There is a major need for a theory of graphical methods”
  (p. 5), and why Kruskal (1975) stated “in choosing, con-
  structing, and comparing graphical methods we have little
  to go on but intuition, rule of thumb, and a kind of master-
  to-apprentice passing along of information. . . . there is
  neither theory nor systematic body of experiment as a
  guide” (p. 28-29).
     There is, of course, much good common sense about
  how to make a graph. There are many treatises on graph
  construction (e.g., Schmid and Schmid 1979), bad prac-
  tice has been uncovered (e.g., Tufte 1983), graphic de-
  signers certainly have shown us how to make a graph
  appealing to the eye (e.g., Marcus et al. 1980), statisti-
  cians have thought intensely about graphical methods for
  data analysis (e.g., Tukey 1977; Chambers et al. 1983),
  and cartographers have devoted great energy to the con-
  struction of statistical maps (Bertin 1973; Robinson, Sale,
  and Morrison 1978). The ANSI manual on time series
  charts (American National Standards Institute 1979) pro-
  vides guidelines for making graphs, but the manual ad-
  mits, “This standard . . . sets forth the best current
  usage, and offers standards ‘by general agreement’ rather
  than ‘by scientific test”’ (p. iii).
      In this article we approach the science of graphs
  through human graphical perception. Our approach in-
  cludes both theory and experimentation to test it.
      The first part of the theory is a list of elementary per-
  ceptual tasks that people perform in extracting quanti-
  tative information from graphs. In the second part we
  hypothesize an ordering of the elementary tasks based
  on how accurately people perform them. We do not argue
  that this accuracy of quantitative extraction is the only
  aspect of a graph for which one might want to develop a
  theory, but it is an important one.
      The theory is testable; we use it to predict the relative
  performance of competing graphs, and then we run ex-
  periments to check the actual performance. The experi-
   ments are of two types: In one, once the graphs are
   drawn, the evidence appears so strong that it is taken
   prima facie to have established the case. When a strong
   effect is perceived by the authors’ eyes and brains, it is
   likely that it will appear to most other people as well. In

                0 Journal of the American Statistical Association
                        September 1984, Volume 79, Number 387
                                           Applications Section

531

##### PDF page 3, left column (x 0-333 pt) #####
                                                                      532

                                                                      the other type, the case is not so clear; we must show
                                                                      the graphs to subjects, ask them to record theirjudgments
                                                                      of quantitative information, and analyze the results to test
                                                                      the theory. Both types of experiments are reported in this
                                                                      article.
                                                                         The ordering of the elementary perceptual tasks can be
                                                                      used to redesign old graphical forms and to design new
                                                                      ones. The goal is to construct a graph that uses elemen-
                                                                      tary tasks as high in the hierarchy as possible. This ap-
                                                                      proach to graph design is applied to a variety of graphs,
                                                                      including bar charts, divided bar charts, pie’charts, and
                                                                      statistical maps with shading. The disconcerting conclu-
                                                                      sion is that radical surgery on these popular types of
                                                                      graphs is needed, and as replacements we offer some al-
                                                                      ternative graphical forms: dot charts, dot charts with
                                                                      grouping, and framed-rectangle charts.
                                                                         This is not the first use of visual perception to study
                                                                      graphs. A number of experiments have been run in this
                                                                      area (see Feinberg and Franklin 1975; Kruskal1975,1982;
Downloaded by [Michigan State University] at 01:41 28 February 2015




                                                                      and Cleveland, Harris, and McGill 1983 for reviews); but
                                                                      most have focused on which of two or more graph forms
                                                                      is better or how a particular aspect of a graph performs,
                                                                      rather than attempting to develop basic principles of
                                                                      graphical perception. Chambers et al. (1983, Ch. 8) pre-
                                                                      sented some discussion of visual perception, along with
                                                                      a host of other general considerations for making graphs
                                                                      for data analysis.
                                                                         Pinker (1982), in an interesting piece of work, devel-
                                                                      oped a model that governs graph comprehension in a
                                                                      broad way. The model deals with the whole range of per-
                                                                      ceptual and cognitive tasks used when people look at a
                                                                      graph, borrowing heavily from existing perceptual and
                                                                      cognitive theory (e.g., the work of Marr and Nishihara
                                                                      1978). No experimentation accompanies Pinker’s mod-
                                                                      eling. The material in this article is much more narrowly
                                                                      focused than Pinker’s; our theory deals with certain spe-
                                                                      cific perceptual tasks that we believe to be critical factors
                                                                      in determining the performance of a graph.
                                                                            2, THEORY: ELEMENTARY PERCEPTUAL TASKS
                                                                        In this and the next section we describe the two parts
                                                                      of our theory, which is a set of hypotheses that deal with
                                                                      the extraction of quantitative information from graphs.
                                                                      The theory is an attempt to identify perceptual building
                                                                      blocks and then describe one aspect of their behavior.
                                                                        The value of identifying basic elements and their in-
                                                                      teractions is that we thus develop a framework to organ-
                                                                      ize knowledge and predict behavior. For example, Ju-
                                                                      lesz’s (1981) theory of textons identified the elementary
                                                                      particles of what is called preattentive vision, the instan-
                                                                      taneous and effortless part of visual perception that the
                                                                      brain performs without focusing attention on local detail.
                                                                      He wrote that “every mature science has been able to
                                                                      identify its basic elements (‘atoms,’ ‘quarks,’ ‘genes,’
                                                                      etc.) and to explain its phenomena as the known inter-
                                                                      action between these elements” (Julesz in press).
                                                                         Figure 1 illustrates 10 elementary perceptual tasks that
                                                                      people use to extract quantitative information from

##### PDF page 3, right column (x 333-648 pt) #####
Journal of the American Statistical Association, September 1984




                                                AlEA



                                                     0 0

                 I
                      m coL# UTUATm
                                            I
                                                #Am




                                                 1
              Figure 1. Elementary perceptual tasks.
                                                             I
                                                             I


 graphs. (Color saturation is not illustrated, to avoid the
 nuisance and expense of color reproduction.) The pic-
 torial symbol used for each task in Figure 1 is meant to
 be suggestive and might not necessarily invoke only that
 task if shown to a viewer. For example, a circle has an
 area associated with it, but it also has a length, and a
 person shown circles might well judge diameters or cir-
 cumferences rather than areas, particularly if told to do
 so.
   We have chosen the term elementary perceptual task
because a viewer performs one or more of these mental-
visual tasks to extract the values of real variables rep-
resented on most graphs. We do not pretend that the items
on our list are completely distinct tasks; for example,
judging angle and direction are clearly related. We do not
pretend that our list is exhaustive; for example, color hue
and texture (Bertin 1973) are two elementary tasks ex-
cluded from the list because they do not have an unam-
biguous single method of ordering from small to large and
thus might be regarded as better for encoding categories
rather than real variables. Nevertheless the list in Figure
 1 is a reasonable first try and will lead to some useful
results on graph construction.
   We will now show how elementary perceptual tasks
are used to extract the quantitative information on a va-
riety of common graph forms.
 Sample Distribution Function Plot
   Figure 2 is a sample distribution function plot of mur-
 ders per 10s people per year in the continental United
 States. The elementary task that one carries out to per-
 ceive the relative magnitude of the values of the data is

##### PDF page 4, left column (x 0-326 pt) #####
                                                                       Cleveland and McGill: Graphical Perception


                                                                             0
                                                                             .
                                                                             .I




                                                                             0
                                                                             d

                                                                             m
                                                                       =
                                                                       :d
                                                                       I-
                                                                       U
                                                                       <
                                                                       U
                                                                       L     t
                                                                             d

                                                                             N
                                                                             d

                                                                             0
                                                                             d
                                                                                                 I                I               I
                                                                                                5                10              15
Downloaded by [Michigan State University] at 01:41 28 February 2015




                                                                                                      MURDER RATE
                                                                            Figure 2. Sample distribution function of 1978 murder rate.




                                                                       judging position along a common scale, which in this case
                                                                       is the horizontal scale.
                                                                       Bar Charts
                                                                           Figures 3 and 4 contain bar charts that were shown to
                                                                        subjects in perceptual experiments. The few noticeable
                                                                        peculiarities are there for purposes of the experiments,
                                                                        described in a later section.
                                                                           Judging position is a task used to extract the values of
                                                                      . the data in the bar chart in the right panel of Figure 3.
                                                                        But now the graphical elements used to portray the
                                                                        data-the bars-also change in length and area. We con-
                                                                       jecture that the primary elementary task is judging po-
                                                                        sition along a common scale, but judgments of area and
                                                                        length probably also play a role.
                                                                       Pie Charts
                                                                         The left panel of Figure 3 is a pie chart, one of the most
                                                                       commonly used graphs for showing the relative sizes of
                                                                       the parts of a whole. For this graph we conjecture that
                                                                       the primary elementary visual task for extracting the nu-
                                                                       merical information is perception of angle, but the areas
                                                                       and arc lengths of the pie slices are variable and probably
                                                                       are also involved in judging the data.
                                                                       Divided Bar Charts
                                                                          Figure 4 has three divided bar charts (Types 2, 4, and
                                                                       5). For each of the three, the totals of A and B can be
                                                                        compared by perceiving position along the scale. Position
                                                                       judgments can also be used to compare the two bottom
                                                                       divisions in each case; for Type 2 the bottom divisions
                                                                       are marked with dots. All other values must be compared
                                                                       by the elementary task of perceiving different bar lengths;

##### PDF page 4, right column (x 326-648 pt) #####
                                                          533

examples are the two divisions marked with dots in Type
4 and the two marked in Type 5 .
Statistical Maps With Shading
  A chart frequently used to portray information as a
function of geographical location is a statistical map with
shading, such as Figure 5 (from Gale and Halperin 1982),
which shows the murder data of Figure 2. Values of a
real variable are encoded by filling in geographical re-
gions using any one of many techniques that produce
gray-scale shadings. In Figure 5 the technique illustrated
uses grids drawn with different spacings; the data are not
proportional to the grid spacing but, rather, to a compli-
cated function of spacing. We conjecture that the primary
elementary task used to extract the data in this case is
the perception of shading, but judging the sizes of the
squares formed by the grids probably also plays a role,
particularly for the large squares.
Curve-Difference Charts
   Another class of commonly used graphs is curve-dif-
ference charts: Two or more curves are drawn on the
graph, and vertical differences between some of the
curves encode real variables that are to be extracted. One
type of curve-difference chart is a divided, or aggregate,
line chart (Monkhouse and Wilkinson 1963), which is typ-
ically used to show how parts of a whole change through
time.
   Figure 6 is a curve-difference chart. The original was
drawn by William Playfair; because our photograph of
the original was of poor quality, we had the figure re-
drafted, trying to keep as close to the original as possible.
The two curves portray exports from England to the East
Indies and imports to England from the East Indies. The
vertical distances between the two curves, which encode
the export-import imbalance, are highlighted. The quan-
titative information about imports and exports is ex-
tracted by perceiving position along a common scale, and
the information about the imbalances is extracted by per-
ceiving length, that is, vertical distance between the two
curves.
Cartesian Graphs and Why They Work
  Figure 7 is a Cartesian graph of paired values of two
variables, x and y. The values of x can be visually ex-



                              "1



               0                   A   B    C   D   E

       Figure 3. Graphs from position-angle experiment.

##### PDF page 5, left column (x 0-323 pt) #####
                                                                      534

                                                                                        TYPE 1                       TYPE 2                 TY
                                                                              100                      100                       .-
                                                                                                                                 IM




                                                                                0
                                                                                       A         B
                                                                                                             1€I A         B       0



                                                                                                                 Figure 4. Graphs from pos
                                                                                                                                           A




                                                                      tracted by perceiving position along a scale, in this case
                                                                      the horizontal axis. The y values can be perceived in a
                                                                      similar manner.
                                                                         The real power of a Cartesian graph, however, does
                                                                      not derive only from one’s ability to perceive the x and
                                                                      y values separately but, rather, from one’s ability to un-
                                                                      derstand the relationship of x and y . For example, in Fig-
                                                                      ure 7 we see that the relationship is nonlinear and see the
Downloaded by [Michigan State University] at 01:41 28 February 2015




                                                                      nature of that nonlinearity. The elementary task that en-
                                                                      ables us to do this is perception of direction. Each pair
                                                                      of points on the plot, ( x i , y i ) and (x,, y j ) , with x i # x j ,
                                                                      has an associated slope




                                                                                                                         MURDER




                                                                      RATES PER 100,000 POPULATION
                                                                                                                         Figure 5. Statistical

##### PDF page 5, right column (x 323-648 pt) #####
Journal of the American Statistical Association, September 1984

YPE 3                  TYPE 4                     TYPE 5
            100,                     100-




        B             A


sition-length experiment.
                            H   B
                                      0.
                                              A            B




 The eye-brain system is capable of extracting such a
 slope by perceiving the direction of the line segment join-
 ing ( x i , y i ) and ( x j , y,). We conjecture that the perception
 of these slopes allows the eye-brain system to imagine
 a smooth curve through the points, which is then used to
 judge the pattern. For example, in Figure 7 one can per-
 ceive that the slopes for pairs of points on the left side
 of the plot are greater than those on the right side of the
  plot, which is what enables one to judge that the rela-
  tionship is nonlinear.
     That the elementary task of judging directions on a
 Cartesian graph is vital for understanding the relationship
 of x and y is demonstrated in Figure 8. The same x and
 y values are shown by paired bars. As with the Cartesian



RATES, 1978                                                    I




 map with shading.

##### PDF page 6, left column (x 0-326 pt) #####
                                                                      Cleveland and McGill: Graphical Perception
Downloaded by [Michigan State University] at 01:41 28 February 2015




                                                                                                                  Figure 6. Curve-differen


                                                                      graph, one can perceive the x and y values by perceiving
                                                                      their positions along a common scale. But with the ability
                                                                      to perceive slopes removed, the pattern of the nonlinear
                                                                      relationship is difficult to perceive.

                                                                      Triple Scatterplots
                                                                          Figure 9 is a triple scatterplot of three real variables,
                                                                      ( x i , y ; , z i ) , for i = I to 25. (The name triple scatterplot
                                                                      was suggested by Anscombe 1973.) The x and y values
                                                                      are portrayed by the centers of the circles and so form
                                                                      an ordinary Cartesian graph. The third variable is en-
                                                                      coded by the areas of the circles; thus the elementary
                                                                      perceptual task for extracting the z; is area perception.
                                                                      Volume Charts
                                                                        The             task required in Figure l o is
                                                                      perception* Such          charts are         very infre-
                                                                      quently in science and             but are common in
                                                                      mass-media graphics (Tufte 1983).
                                                                      Juxtaposed Cartesian Graphs
                                                                                    two Or more panels Of graphs are juxta-
                                                                      posed with the scales on the panels the same. Figure 1 I ,
                                                                      which will be exdained later. is an examde of this: we
                                                                      juxtaposed the 'graphs because superimposing them
                                                                      would have resulted in an uninterpretable mess. In Figure
                                                                       11, when we compare the log errors from two panels that

##### PDF page 6, right column (x 326-648 pt) #####
                                                       535




nce chart after Playfair.


 are not in the same row, we must make judgments of
 positions along nonaligned scales.

          3. THEORY: ORDERING THE ELEMENTARY
          PERCEPTUAL TASKS BY THE ACCURACY
                     OF EXTRACTION
   In this section we hypothesize an ordering of the I0
elementary perceptual tasks on the basis of the accuracy
with which people can extract quantitative information
by using them. One elementary perceptual task is taken
to be more accurate than another if it leads to human
judgments that come closer to the actual encoded quan-
tities.
   One must be careful not to fall into a conceptual trap
by adopting accuracy as a criterion. We are not saying
 that the primary purpose of a graph is to convey numbers
 with as many decimal places as possible. We agree with
 Ehrenberg (1975) that if this were the only goal, tables
 would be better. The power of a graph is its ability to
 enable one to take in the quantitative information, or-
 ganize it, and see patterns and structure not readily re-
 vealed by other         of studying the data.
   Our premise, however, is this:
    A graphical f o r m that involves elementary perceptual
    tasks that lead to more accurate judgments than an-
    other graphical f o r m (with the same quantitative in-

##### PDF page 7, left column (x 0-322 pt) #####
                                                                      536


                                                                            D
                                                                            m
                                                                                                                  m       .


                                                                                                             o m
                                                                            D
                                                                            m




                                                                      t
                                                                            0
                                                                            -r
                                                                                                 0




                                                                            0
                                                                            N




                                                                                                 r            1               1         I
Downloaded by [Michigan State University] at 01:41 28 February 2015




                                                                                                 20          40               60       80

                                                                                                                      X
                                                                                                 Figure 7. Cartesian graph.



                                                                           formation) will result in better organization and in-
                                                                           crease the chances of a correct perception of patterns
                                                                           and behavior.
                                                                      In Section 5 we give examples of patterns emerging when
                                                                      elementary perceptual tasks are changed to increase the
                                                                      accuracy of judgments.


                                                                             0
                                                                             Ei


                                                                             0
                                                                             m
                                                                                                                                   n
                                                                             0
                                                                             ID
                                                                      u)
                                                                      W
                                                                      3
                                                                      -I
                                                                      <
                                                                      >
                                                                             0
                                                                             t




                                                                             0
                                                                             N




                                                                             0
                                                                                     X I   X I   XI X I X I X I X I X I X I X I X I X I X I X I X I

                                                                                  Figure 8. Bar chart with paired X and Y values.

##### PDF page 7, right column (x 322-648 pt) #####
Joumal of the American Statistical Association, September 1984




      m




      m
                       O0
 *
      *
                0"
      N




          0        2          4           6        0       10

                                    X
                   Figure 9. Triple scatterplot.



   The following are the 10 elementary tasks in Figure 1,
 ordered from most to least accurate:
     1. Position along a common scale
     2. Positions along nonaligned scales
     3. Length, direction, angle
     4. Area
     5 . Volume, curvature
     6. Shading, color saturation




                    Figure 70. Volume chart.

##### PDF page 8, left column (x 0-331 pt) #####
                                                                      Cleveland and McGIll: Graphical Perception

                                                                                       TRUE = 8 2 . 5                 TRUE = 82.5                 TRUE

                                                                                                            :-I

                                                                      n
                                                                      Ln
                                                                            ni
                                                                                                  0
                                                                                                        0   "4
                                                                                                            ni                       C

                                                                      N                      0              0
                                                                                                                                0
                                                                      4     ni                              ni-

                                                                      t     "                               "
                                                                                 ' 0                        L o        0    0
                                                                      I12
                                                                      0                                     0
                                                                      i
                                                                      Y     9-                              d
                                                                      K     "
                                                                      W

                                                                                  1      2   3    4     5         1     2   3   4    5        1     2


                                                                                       TRUE = 46. 4                   TRUE = 46. 4                TRUE
                                                                                                            10                           10

                                                                                                        0   ni                           m'
Downloaded by [Michigan State University] at 01:41 28 February 2015




                                                                                                            0                            0
                                                                                                            ni                       C   ni

                                                                                                            10                           10
                                                                                                  0                                                0
                                                                                                            ni                           Ri

                                                                                             0              O                   0        0
                                                                                                            N                            ni
                                                                                                                            0

                                                                                                            -.
                                                                                                            10
                                                                                                                       0
                                                                                                                                         10
                                                                                                                                         I
                                                                                                                                              3
                                                                                                                  3
                                                                                         0                  0                            0
                                                                                                            d                            I


                                                                                  3

                                                                                  1      2    3   4     5         1     2   3   4    5        1     2


                                                                                                                                         TYPE OF
                                                                            Figure 7 7 . Position-length experiment: Midmeans of log absolu


                                                                      Three of the ranks-3, 5 , and 6-have more than one
                                                                      task; at the moment there is not enough information to
                                                                      separate the ties.
                                                                        The hypothesized ordering of the elementary tasks is
                                                                      based on information from a variety of sources: our own
                                                                      reasoning and experimentation with various graph forms,
                                                                      results of psychophysical experiments, and the theory of
                                                                      psychophysics. The following discussion attempts only a
                                                                      partial documentation. The sources of the theoretical or-
                                                                      dering are not the most cogent factors in establishing it;
                                                                      rather, using the theory to predict the performance of
                                                                      graph forms and then running experiments to check the
                                                                      predictions is the cogent process for validating and re-
                                                                      vising the theory. It is only through such a procedure that
                                                                      we can claim to be establishing a science of graphical
                                                                      perception. A few comments about the sources of the
                                                                      ordering, however, will at least convey the process used
                                                                      to devise it.
                                                                         In the ordering of perceptual tasks, length judgments
                                                                      are hypothesized to be more accurate than area judg-
                                                                      ments, which in turn are hypothesized to be more ac-
                                                                      curate than volume judgments. This ordering is based on
                                                                      a combination of psychophysical theory and experimental
                                                                      results.

##### PDF page 8, right column (x 331-648 pt) #####
                                                                            537

E = 68. 1                  TRUE = 68. 1                       TRUE = 56.2
                                              ;I---
                                              0
                                              ni-
                                                                             0
                                              10
                                                                        0
                                              ni-                   0




    3   4    5
                 :I,
                 "


                       1
                             ,




                             2
                                 ,




                                 3
                                     ,




                                     4    5
                                              0
                                              ni'
                                              In
                                              1 - 0

                                              0
                                              d




                                                      -   1
                                                               0




                                                                2   3   4     5


E = 38. 3                  TRUE = 26. 1                       TRUE = 17. B

                                              -:1
                                              0

            C                                 P i -


                 "                            10
        0        ni'                      G   ni-
                                                      I
                 0                            0
                                     0
                 ni'                          r\i'
                                                                        0
   0                                          "


                       --
                                                                    0        G
                                              L o              0




    3   4    5         1     2   3   4    5               1     2   3   4     5


  JUDGEMENT
ute errors against judgment type for 10 pairs of judged values.


      Suppose an individual is asked to judge the magnitude
  of some aspect of a physical object such as length, area,
  volume, distance, loudness, weight, or pitch. The power
  law of theoretical psychophysics (Stevens 1975) says that
  i f p is the perceived magnitude and a is the actual mag-
  nitude, then p is related to a by p = ka". If a1 and u z are
  two such magnitudes and p1 and pz are corresponding
  perceived values, thenpl/p, = (al/az)". Thus only if ci
   = 1 is the perceived scale the same as the actual physical
  scale. For visual perception this power law appears to be
  a good description of reality (Baird 1970).
      Many psychophysical experiments have been con-
  ducted to estimate values of a. For judgments of length,
  area, or volume, average values of ci from different ex-
  periments can vary according to how instructions are
  phrased and according to many experimental factors.
  And for a particular experiment, values of ci can vary
  substantially for different subjects. Baird (1970) gave an
  excellent review of a large number of experiments; one
  pattern that emerges is that values of a tend to be rea-
  sonably close to l for length judgments, smaller than l
  for area judgments, and even smaller for volume judg-
  ments. This means that length judgments tend to be un-
  biased, whereas there tends to be distortion in area judg-

##### PDF page 9, left column (x 0-327 pt) #####
                                                                      538

                                                                      ments and even more in volume judgments. Partly for
                                                                      this reason we have set the order (as given previously)
                                                                      to be length, then area, and then volume.
                                                                          Of course increased bias does not necessarily imply
                                                                      less overall accuracy. The reasoning, however, is that the
                                                                      mechanism leading to bias might well lead to other types
                                                                      of inaccuracy as well. We might try to combat bias and
                                                                      increase the accuracy of judgments by taking the areas
                                                                      or volumes to be proportional to power-transformed val-
                                                                      ues of the data. Cleveland, Harris, and McGill(l983) gave
                                                                      reasons for not doing this, however, one of which is that
                                                                      the power coefficients vary from one person to the next.
                                                                          The reason for putting position along nonaligned scales
                                                                      ahead of length is that there are additional visual cues on
                                                                      nonaligned scales to help in making judgments. We il-
                                                                      lustrate this with one particular graph form. The top of
                                                                      Figure 12 shows two bars, or rectangles, with equal
                                                                      widths and unequal heights. Suppose bar height encodes
                                                                       some real variable; the elementary perceptual task-
Downloaded by [Michigan State University] at 01:41 28 February 2015




                                                                      judging length-is hard enough that we cannot easily per-
                                                                      ceive which bar is longer in Figure 12.
                                                                          In the bottom of Figure 12, the same bars are drawn,
                                                                      but they are surrounded by frames of equal size and con-
                                                                       struction. Each symbol, called afrurned rectangle, is ac-
                                                                      tually a little graph with a scale and with one number
                                                                      portrayed. The elementary perceptual task is judging po-
                                                                       sition along nonaligned scales, and now we can easily see
                                                                      that the right bar represents a larger quantity than the
                                                                      left. Actually, because the framed rectangle is such a sim-
                                                                      ple graphical form, the task ofjudging position along non-
                                                                      aligned scales really amounts to two length judgments (as
                                                                      will be discussed shortly). In other circumstances, where
                                                                      the graph form is more complex (such as Figure 11, which
                                                                      was discussed in Section 2), a more complex set of visual
                                                                      tasks makes up the position-along-nonaligned-scales task
                                                                      because there are more visual cues.
                                                                          Weber’s Law (cf. Baird and Noma 1978), an important
                                                                      law of theoretical psychophysics, helps to explain how
                                                                      the frame of a framed rectangle increases accuracy. Sup-
                                                                      pose x is the length of some physical object, such as a
                                                                      line or bar. Suppose that dp(x),a positive number, is de-
                                                                      fined by the following: An object with length x + d&)
                                                                      is detected with probability p to be longer than the object
                                                                      with length x . Then Weber’s Law states that for fixed p ,
                                                                       dp(x) = k p x , where kp does not depend on x . This law
                                                                       appears to hold up well for a variety of perceptual judg-
                                                                       ments, although Gregory (1966) argued that a rnodifica-
                                                                       tion for small values of x is needed.
                                                                          The unfilled portion of a framed rectangle creates an
                                                                       unfilled bar with a length equal to the length of the frame
                                                                       minus the length of the filled bar. The lengths of the un-
                                                                      filled bars give additional visual cues to help in judging
                                                                       the encoded numerical quantities. Suppose two framed
                                                                       rectangles have filled bars that are long and close in
                                                                       length, such as in the bottom of Figure 12. Then the per-
                                                                       centage difference of the lengths of the unfilled bars is
                                                                       much greater than that of the filled bars; by Weber’s Law
                                                                       one c& much more readily detect a difference in the short

##### PDF page 9, right column (x 327-648 pt) #####
Journal of the American Statistical Association, September 1984




                     A




                                   n




                     A

             Figure 72. Bars and framed rectangles.



 unfilled bars than in the long filled bars. Thus it is the
 unfilled bars in the bottom of Figure 12 that allow the
 perception of a difference that is not perceptible in the
 top.
   In Section 5.3 we put the framed rectangle to work to
 design a new type of statistical map.
                   4. EXPERIMENTATION
 4.1 Introduction
   We began checking the hypothesized ordering by run-
 ning two experiments. The experiments demonstrated
 very clearly that some judgments of position along a com-
 mon scale are more accurate than some judgments of
 length and of angle. Strictly speaking we cannot do more
 than assert that the results hold for the particular types
 of graphs in the experiment, but the important point is
 that the theory has correctly predicted the outcome. This
 section contains a detailed description of the experiment

##### PDF page 10, left column (x 0-330 pt) #####
                                                                      Cleveland and McGill: Graphical Perception

                                                                      and a detailed analysis of the data. (Those not interested
                                                                      in the details can read the summary in Section 4.5 and
                                                                      proceed to the application of the theory and experiments
                                                                      to graph design in Section 5 . )

                                                                      4.2 Design
                                                                          In one experiment 55 subjects were shown the five
                                                                       types of graphs depicted in Figure 4. (The graphs used in
                                                                       the experiment were much larger than in Figure 4, each
                                                                       being on a separate 8 t x 11 page and filling a large portion
                                                                       of the page.) Each graph was either a divided bar chart
                                                                       (as in the rightmost panel) or a grouped bar chart (as in
                                                                       the leftmost panel). A grouped bar chart can be used to
                                                                       show the same type of data as a divided bar chart by
                                                                       encoding the total by the left bar of each group and en-
                                                                       coding the divisions by the remaining bars. On a grouped
                                                                       bar chart, unlike on a divided bar chart, all values can be
                                                                       extracted and compared by judging position along a com-
                                                                       mon scale.
Downloaded by [Michigan State University] at 01:41 28 February 2015




                                                                          On each graph two bars or divisions were marked with
                                                                       dots, and subjects were asked to judge what percent the
                                                                       smaller is of the larger. For the grouped bar charts, the
                                                                       dots appeared either in the second and third bars of the
                                                                      left group or in the second bars of the two groups. For
                                                                      the divided bar chart, the dots appeared either in the bot-
                                                                      tom divisions of the two bars or in the top divisions of
                                                                       the two bars or in the top two divisions of the left bar.
                                                                       For Judgment Types 1-3, subjects had to judge position
                                                                       along a common scale, and for Judgment Types 4 and 5 ,
                                                                       subjects had to judge length. Hence we call this the po-
                                                                       sition-length experiment.
                                                                          In this position-length experiment, the values involved
                                                                      in the subjects’ judgments were
                                                                                  s i = 10 x 10(i-l)’lz, i = 1, . . . , 10,
                                                                      which are equally spaced on a log scale and range from
                                                                       10 to 56.2.Subjects judged the ratios of 10 pairs of values;
                                                                      the ratios ranged from .18to .83. Each pair of values was
                                                                      judged five times, once for each of the five judgment
                                                                      types.
                                                                          Bar segments and heights not judged were chosen es-
                                                                       sentially at random, but subject to certain constraints. In
                                                                      particular, for Type 4 stimuli neither the top nor the bot-
                                                                      tom of the two topmost bar segments was permitted to
                                                                      have the same y value, since this would permit judgment
                                                                      along a common scale.
                                                                          For each graph the subjects were asked to indicate
                                                                      which of the two bars or two segments was the smaller.
                                                                       Next they were to judge what percentage the smaller was
                                                                       of the larger. The instructions specifically stated that sub-
                                                                      jects were to make “a quick visual judgment and not try
                                                                      to make precise measurements, either mentally or with
                                                                       a physical object such as a pencil or your finger.” Only
                                                                      four errors occurred in the choice of which bar or segment
                                                                      was smaller.
                                                                          Graphs were presented in stapled packets. The instruc-
                                                                       tion sheet was the first page. The next five were practice
                                                                       graphs, one of each type, followed by a page marked

##### PDF page 10, right column (x 330-648 pt) #####
                                                         539

“STOP.” The 50 graphs, in random order, completed the
packet. All packets were identical. Answers were rec-
orded on separate answer sheets, and subjects were in-
structed not to write on the graphs.
   In the second experiment 54 subjects judged the two
types of graphs shown in Figure 3; one type was a pie
chart and the other was an ordinary bar chart. Ten sets
of five numbers that added to 100 were generated, and
each set was encoded by a bar chart and a pie chart,
resulting in 20 graphs. For each graph, the answer sheet
indicated which pie segment or bar was largest and sub-
jects were asked to judge what percentage each of the
other four values was of the maximum. Since subjects
were judging position or angle, we call this the position-
angle experiment.
   The values were randomly generated by a uniform ran-
 dom-number generator, with results rescaled to sum to
 100. Each set was constrained to meet three require-
 ments: The minimum value had to be greater than 3; the
 maximum value had to be less than 39, and all differences
between values in a set had to be greater than .l. Sets
 not meeting these requirements were rejected. For the
 values that actually arose in the constrained random se-
 lection, the ratios ranged from 10.0 to 99.7%.
   The instruction sheet described the task to be per-
 formed on each stimulus-“to judge what percent each
 of the other segments or bars is of the largest.” It also
 explained that on the answer sheet, the largest segment
 would be marked with an X.As in the previous experi-
 ment, subjects were instructed to make quick visual judg-
 ments, not measurements.
   Graphs were put in stapled packets. The instruction
sheet was the first page. The next two pages were practice
graphs-one bar chart and one pie chart-followed by a
page marked “STOP.” The 20 graphs, in random order,
completed the packets. All packets were identical. An-
 swers were recorded on separate sheets.

4.3 Data Exploratlon
Subjects and Experimental Units
   In the position-length experiment, the judgments of
four people were deleted because it was clear from their
answers that they had not followed instructions. In the
position-angle experiment, the judgments of three sub-
jects were deleted for the same reason. For both exper-
iments, 51 subjects remained for analysis.
   For each experiment the subjects fell into two cate-
gories: (1) a group of females, mostly housewives, with-
out substantial technical experience; (2) a mixture of
 males and females with substantial technical training and
working in technical jobs. Most of the subjects in the
position-length experiment participated in the position-
angle experiment; in all cases repeat subjects judged the
position-angle graphs first.
   We did not detect any differences in the accuracies of
 the judgments of the nontechnical and technical groups.
 This is not surprising, since the perceptual tasks that sub-

##### PDF page 11, left column (x 0-317 pt) #####
                                                                      540

                                                                      jects were asked to carry out were very basic ones carried
                                                                      out in everyday activities. Thus we treated the subjects
                                                                      as a homogeneous sample that could be used to make
                                                                      inferences about people in general.
                                                                         It is important to think of each judgment made from a
                                                                      graph in the two experiments as an experimental unit. In
                                                                      the position-length experiment there were 50 judgments,
                                                                      which can be cross-classified into 10 ratios judged for
                                                                      each of five types of judgments: three length judgments
                                                                      and two position judgments. In the position-angle ex-
                                                                      periment there were 80 judgments, which can be cross-
                                                                       classified into 40 judged ratios for each of two types of
                                                                      jugments: one angle judgment and one position judgment.
                                                                      Accuracy
                                                                        To measure accuracy we used
                                                                            logz( I judged percent - true percent I + I/@.
Downloaded by [Michigan State University] at 01:41 28 February 2015




                                                                      A log scale seemed appropriate to measure relative error;
                                                                      we added 1/8 to prevent a distortion of the scale at the
                                                                      bottom end because the absolute errors in some cases got
                                                                      very close to zero. We used log base 2 because average
                                                                      relative errors tended to change by factors less than 10.
                                                                         For a large number of the experimental units in each
                                                                      experiment, normal probability plots were made of the
                                                                      log errors; they showed substantial nonnormality in the
                                                                      empirical distribution of the log errors across subjects for
                                                                      each experimental unit. The deviations from normality
                                                                      were
                                                                         1. Discrete data caused by subjects' tendencies to use
                                                                      multiples of five as answers
                                                                        2. Mild skewness, sometimes to the left and sometimes
                                                                      to the right
                                                                        3. Frequent outliers
                                                                      Principally because of the outliers, we estimated the lo-
                                                                      cation of the distribution of the 51 log error values for
                                                                      each experimental unit by the midmean, a robust estimate
                                                                      of location (Mosteller and Tukey 1977).
                                                                         Figure 13 shows plots of the 50 midmeans of the log
                                                                      absolute errors for the position-length experiment, and
                                                                      Figure 14 shows plots of the 80 midmeans for the posi-
                                                                      tion-angle experiment. In both figures the log absolute
                                                                      errors are plotted against the true percentages for each
                                                                      judgment type; superimposed on each plot are smooth
                                                                      curves computed by a scatterplot smoothing procedure
                                                                      called lowess (Cleveland 1979). For the position-length
                                                                      experiment, there appears to be a mild dependence of the
                                                                      log absolute errors on the true value for Judgment Types
                                                                       1-4 and a larger dependence for Type 5 . In the position-
                                                                      angle experiment, there is a dependence for the pie charts
                                                                      but very little for the bar charts.
                                                                         Figure 11 is another plot of the 50 midmeans of the log
                                                                       absolute errors for the position-length experiment. Each
                                                                      panel shows the five midmeans for one of the 10 pairs of
                                                                       values whose ratio was judged; the five midmeans for the
                                                                      five types of judgments are plotted against the type num-
                                                                       ber. Above each panel is the true percentage that the

##### PDF page 11, right column (x 317-648 pt) #####
Journal of the American Statistical Association, September 1984

                 m-1                            TYPE-2




 linl
 J,
   - io
   0
            0
                   0
                                4 --n

                                    0




                 YWE-9                          TYPE-4




   -
   0




        2   0    4   0   8  Q   m
                TRUE RRcplr


   Figure 13. Position-length experiment: Midmeans of log absolute
 errors against true percentages for five judgment types.



  subjects were judging. The striking pattern is that the log
 absolute errors almost always increase from Type 1
 through Type 5. (The type numbers were chosen after the
 analysis to correspond to most accurate (1) to least ac-
 curate (3.)   We will discuss this pattern in more detail
 later.
     The midmeans from the left panel of Figure 14 minus
 the corresponding midmeans in the right panel are plotted
 in Figure 15 against the true percentage, with a lowess.
  curve superimposed. In only 3 of the 40 cases was the
 pie chart more accurate on average than the bar chart.
     Figure 16 shows average errors for each of the five
 judgment types in the position-length experiment (top)
 and each of the two judgment types in the position-angle
  experiment (bottom). The five values in the top panel are
 the means of the 10 midmeans for each judgment type
  (i.e., the means of the 10 midmeans in each panel of Fig-
 ure 13). The two values in the bottom panel are the means
 of the 40 midmeans for each judgment type (i.e., the
  means of the 40 midmeans in each panel of Figure 14).

##### PDF page 12, left column (x 0-332 pt) #####
                                                                      Cleveland and McGIll: Graphlcal Perception          .


                                                                                                       ANGLE



                                                                                                       0        0

                                                                                                                              0




                                                                                                                              \
                                                                                    P
                                                                                                                                  0
                                                                                                       0
                                                                                            0                                     0
                                                                                                                                  0
                                                                                   0




                                                                                   0
Downloaded by [Michigan State University] at 01:41 28 February 2015




                                                                                        20       40        60        80           100
                                                                                                 TRUE PERCENT
                                                                               Figure 14. Position-angle experiment: Midmeans of log abs



                                                                      A 95% confidence interval is shown for each mean; these
                                                                      intervals are discussed in Section 4.4. The initial mid-
                                                                      means provide the requisite robustness to a small number
                                                                      of unusual observations. Since the midmeans are well
                                                                      behaved and have no distant outliers, we have taken a
                                                                      mean, rather than a robust statistic, to summarize them.
                                                                         The means in Figure 16 provide convenient, but rough,

                                                                      u)
                                                                      U                                0
                                                                      0
                                                                      U
                                                                      U
                                                                      W
                                                                                                              0
                                                                      W    N
                                                                      I-
                                                                      3
                                                                      A
                                                                      0
                                                                      u)
                                                                      m
                                                                      <
                                                                      0 4
                                                                      0
                                                                      A
                                                                      LL
                                                                      0
                                                                      W
                                                                      u
                                                                      2    0
                                                                      W
                                                                      U                 0
                                                                      W
                                                                      LL
                                                                      LL           0
                                                                      U
                                                                      0

                                                                                        20        40         60        80
                                                                                                  TRUE PERCENT
                                                                         Figure 75. Positon-angle experiment: Angle midmeans minus Po-
                                                                      sition rnidrneans against true percentages.

##### PDF page 12, right column (x 332-648 pt) #####
                                                                      541

                                       POSITION



     G
     N


      +       I




     ?1                                                8q
                               0                   0        0
                               0

                  8," On           0",'~0
                  0
     -I                                 O 0   0
                           0
     0                                                      0
     u)                                                0
     m                     0
     so               0                                          0
                                                                 0
     N       I                                                   0


     ;:{
     m
                                         0




     S ?-I
     u            0
                      I            I          I        I          I


                      20           40         80       80        100
                                   TRUE PERCENT
solute errors against true percentages for two judgment types.



   summaries of the two experiments. The summaries are
   rough because it is clear from Figures 13 and 14 that there
   is some dependence of log error on the true percent.
   Within an experiment it is reasonable to compare the
   means of the judgments because the set of true percent-
   ages is the same for each judgment, but it would be in-
   appropriate to compare the means of the first experiment
   with those of the second.
      The top panel of Figure 16 shows that average errors
   for length judgments are considerably larger than those
   for position judgments. A multiple comparison analysis
   (discussed in Section 4.4) showed that all pairs of the five
   averages are significantly different at the .05 level, except
   for Judgment Types 2 and 3. The larger of the two length
   values is 1.32 log units greater than the smallest of the
   three position values, which is a factor of 2'.32 = 2.5.
   The smaller length value is .51 log units greater than the
   largest position value, which is a factor of 1.4. Thus the
   average errors for length judgments are 40%-250% larger
   than those for position judgments.
      The bottom panel of Figure 16 shows that the average
   error for angle judgments is considerably larger than for
   position judgments. The difference is .97 on the log scale,
   which is a factor of 2.97 = 1.96, and is statistically sig-
   nificant.
   Large Absolute Errors
      The top panel of Figure 17 shows a summary of the
   large errors for the position-length experiment. Of the
   2,550 judgments made by the subjects, 136 had a log error
   greater than 4- The top panel Of Figure l7 shows the per-
   centage of these large errors that occurred for each of the

##### PDF page 13, left column (x 0-333 pt) #####
                                                                      542



                                                                      TYPE 1 ( P O S I T I O N )


                                                                      TYPE 2 ( P O S I T I O N )


                                                                      TYPE 3 ( P O S I T I O N )


                                                                         TYPE 4        (LENGTH)


                                                                         TYPE 5 (LENGTH)




                                                                      TYPE 1 ( P O S I T I O N )
Downloaded by [Michigan State University] at 01:41 28 February 2015




                                                                             TYPE 2 (ANGLE)



                                                                                                          1.0                    1.5

                                                                                                                       L O G BASE
                                                                        Figure 76. Log absolute error means and 95% confidence intervals
                                                                      angle experiment [bottom).



                                                                      judgment types. Seventy-eight percent of the large errors
                                                                      occurred for the length judgments; since there were three
                                                                      position judgments for each two length judgments, the
                                                                      rate of occurrence of large errors for length judgments is
                                                                      5.3 times that for position judgments.
                                                                         The bottom panel of Figure 17 shows the percentage
                                                                      of large errors (those greater than 4) for the position-
                                                                       angle experiment; in this experiment 219 of the 4,080
                                                                      judgments had large errors. Eighty-eight percent of the
                                                                      large errors occurred for the angle judgments; thus the
                                                                      rate of occurrence of large errors for the angle judgments
                                                                      is 7.3 times that for the position judgments.
                                                                      Bias
                                                                        Previously it was pointed out that subjective estimates
                                                                      of physical magnitudes can have systematic biases. To
                                                                      check for this in the two experiments, the errors,
                                                                                judged percentage - true percentage,
                                                                      were analyzed. Just as for the log absolute errors, the
                                                                      midmeans of the errors across subjects were computed
                                                                      for each experimental unit in the two experiments. These
                                                                      midmeans are plotted against the true percentages for
                                                                      each judgment type in the position-length experiment
                                                                      (Figure 18) and the position-angle experiment (Figure

##### PDF page 13, right column (x 333-648 pt) #####
 Journal of the American Statistical Association, September 1984




                 2. 0                   2. 5                    3. 0

 2 (ABSOLUTE ERROR                 +   . 125)
s for judgment types in position-length experiment [top) andposition-




   19), just as they were for the midmeans of the log absolute
  errors in Figures 13 and 14.
     Figure 18 shows a convincing pattern for Judgment
  Type 5 ; there appears to be substantial negative bias for
  true percentages between 30 and 70. Figure 19 shows a
  pattern for the angle judgments on the pie charts; again,
  in the middle range of the true percentages, there are
  many experimental units with a negative bias.
     Figure 20 shows the means of the midmeans for each
  judgment type in the two experiments; thus each value
  in the top panel is the mean of the midmeans in one panel
  of Figure 18, and each value in the bottom panel is the
   mean of the midmeans in one panel of Figure 19. As with
   the log absolute errors, these values are rough summaries
  because there appears to be a dependence of bias on the
  true percentage. Also shown are 95% confidence inter-
   vals for each mean, computed by a procedure described
   in the next section. The only source of significant bias
   appears to be the two length judgments and the angle
  judgment. The biases in these cases obviously contribute
   significantly to the log absolute errors. To see this, sup-
   pose that all subjects’ judgments for an experimental unit
   had been identical; then we would have had

          logz( I bias 1 + .125) = log absolute error.

##### PDF page 14, left column (x 0-326 pt) #####
                                                                      Cleveland and McGIll: Graphical Perception

                                                                      The values of the log absolute bias for the Type 4 length
                                                                      judgment, the Type 5 length judgment, and the angle judg-
                                                                      ment are
                                                                                        .98    2.20     1.36,
                                                                      respectively. The corresponding actual log absolute er-
                                                                      rors are
                                                                                       2.36    2.72    2.01.
                                                                      Thus the log absolute biases are not small compared with
                                                                      the log absolute errors.

                                                                      4.4 Confidence Intervals
                                                                         The bootstrap (Efron 1982) proved to be a very con-
                                                                      venient tool for estimating the sampling distributions of
                                                                      the means of the log absolute errors and the biases. Be-
                                                                      cause each subject judged all of the experimental units
                                                                      in an experiment, the judgments of one unit are correlated
Downloaded by [Michigan State University] at 01:41 28 February 2015




                                                                      with those of another, and modeling this correlation
                                                                      would have been a substantial chore. This correlation,
                                                                      the nonnormality of the log errors, and the use of the
                                                                      midmean make mathematical deviations of sampling dis-
                                                                      tributions intractable.
                                                                      Bootstrap Distribution of Means for Log Absolute Errors
                                                                        For each experiment we bootstrapped by drawing 1,000
                                                                      random samples of size 51 with replacement from the 51



                                                                      TYPE 1 (POSITION)                . . .a

                                                                      TYPE 2 (POSITION)                ...*

                                                                      TYPE 3 (POSITION)                .....a

                                                                         TYPE 4 (LENGTH)               ............... -0

                                                                         TYPE 5 (LENGTH)               ....................



                                                                      TYPE 1 (POSITION)                .......

                                                                           TYPE 2 (ANGLE)              ...................
                                                                                                       I                   I

                                                                                                       0                  20


                                                                                                                   Figure 7 7. Percenta

##### PDF page 14, right column (x 326-648 pt) #####
                                                           543

    subjects. For each sample, the means of the midmeans
    of the log absolute errors were computed as in Figure 16.
    Thus in the position-length experiment, there were 1,000
    values of the five judgment-type means for the log ab-
    solute errors; this multivariate empirical distribution in
    five dimensions appeared to be well approximated by a
    multivariate normal distribution. This was established by
    making probability plots of the five marginal distributions
    and a number of linear combinations. The standard de-
    viations and the correlation coefficients computed from
    the five vectors of 1,000 numbers serve as estimates of
    the standard deviations and correlations of the five judg-
    ment-type means. Similarly in the position-angle exper-
    iment, there were 1,000 values of the two judgment-type
    means; for the log absolute errors, this bootstrap distri-
    bution was well approximated by a bivariate normal one.
    The 95% confidence intervals in Figure 16 are simply plus
    and minus 1.96 times the bootstrap standard deviation
    estimates.
       Using the normal approximation to the bootstrap dis-
    tribution of the means in the position-angle experiment,
    a 95% confidence interval for the difference (angle -
    position) in the log absolute error means is (-79, 1.15).
    For the position-length experiment, the bootstrap dis-
    tribution can be used to generate simultaneous confi-
    dence intervals for all pairs of differences of the means
    without being tied to any specific multiple comparison




0


......           a




............................                    -0

          I               I                I                I

         40              60               80              100

              PERCENT
age of large errors.

##### PDF page 15, left column (x 0-328 pt) #####
                                                                      544

                                                                                           TYPE   -   1                             TYPE   -   P

                                                                          n




                                                                          0



                                                                      I   n




                                                                          2
                                                                                                                         m    4    o   6       o    e   n
                                                                                                                                    TYPE   -   4

                                                                                                                                                    0
                                                                          n




                                                                          0




                                                                          L:
Downloaded by [Michigan State University] at 01:41 28 February 2015




                                                                                                                                                         0

                                                                          2
                                                                               Z     D    u   1       M   U    l         20       40           10       80

                                                                                          TYPE    -   5
                                                                                                                                  TRUE PERCENT


                                                                          ul




                                                                          0




                                                                          ?


                                                                          2
                                                                               0;
                                                                               20         40      M           80
                                                                                         TRUE PERCENT

                                                                        Figure 18. Position-length experiment: Midmeans of errors
                                                                      against true percentages for five judgment types.


                                                                      method, such as the S or T method (Scheffk 1959). Let
                                                                      Bi, for i = 1, . . . , 5, be the judgment-type means for the
                                                                      log absolute errors. Let Bik*, for k = 1, . . . , 5 a n d j =
                                                                      1, . . . , l,OOO, be the 5,000 bootstrap values, and let sii
                                                                      be the standard deviation of Bik* - Oik*, fork = 1 , . . . ,
                                                                      1,000. We found the c such that for 95% of the 1,OOO
                                                                      bootstrap 5-tuples,
                                                                                         I (ei - ei) - (eik* eik*) I Ic s i j .
                                                                                                                   -


                                                                      This turned out to be 2.79. Thus
                                                                                    B i - Bj & 2.79 s i j          for i , j = 1, . . . , 5
                                                                      are a set of simultaneous 95% intervals for the differences
                                                                      of the means; these intervals are displayed in Figure 21.
                                                                      Note that only the means for Types 2 and 3 are not sig-
                                                                      nificantly different at the .05 level.
                                                                      Bootstrap Distribution of Means for Errors
                                                                        The bootstrap was used to assess the sampling distri-
                                                                      bution of the error means displayed in Figure 20; the
                                                                      bootstrap distribution was generated by 1,000 samples in

##### PDF page 15, right column (x 328-648 pt) #####
Journal of the Amerlcan Statistical Association, September 1984

 a manner analogous to that described for the log absolute
 errors. Again, the multivariate normal was found to be a
 good approximation, and the confidence intervals in Fig-
 ure 20 show plus and minus 1.96 times the bootstrap stan-
 dard errors.

 4.5 Summary of the Experiments
    Two experiments were run in which subjects judged
 bar charts and pie charts. In the first experiment, five
 types of judgments were made-two length judgments
 and three judgments of position along a common scale.
 In the second experiment, there were two types of judg-
 ment-position and angle. For all types of judgments,
 subjects made visual assessments of what percentage one
 value was of a larger value; thus all recorded values were
 between 0 and 100. In both experiments there were 51
 subjects with usable data.
    Figure 16 summarizes the accuracy of the judgments.
 The top panel shows the first experiment and the bottom
 panel shows the second. The scale is the log base 2 of
 the absolute errors plus 1/8. In the first experiment, po-
 sition judgments were more accurate than length judg-
 ments by factors varying from 1.4 to 2.5. In the second
 experiment, position judgments were 1.96 times as ac-
 curate as angle judgments. The 95% confidence intervals



;
 shown in Figure 16 were computed by using the boot-
 strap. An important part of the contribution to the errors
 for length and angle judgments is consistent bias. When
 the true percentages are in the range of 25-50, subjects
 tend to underestimate values for these types of judg-
 ments.
    The first experiment suggested that the position task
 should be expanded to a whole range of tasks. As the
 distance between the two values being judged increased
 along an axis perpendicular to the common scale, the
 accuracy decreased. Type 1 judgments had the smallest
 distance, Type 2 the next smallest, and Type 3 the largest.
 Not surprisingly, after just two experiments a revision of
 the theory seems appropriate.

      5. APPLYING THE THEORY TO ANALYZE AND
           REDESIGN SEVERAL MUCH-USED
                   GRAPH FORMS
    The mode of graph design that we advocate is the con-
 struction of a graphical form that uses elementary per-
 ceptual tasks as high in the hierarchy as possible. The
 hypothesis is that by selecting as high as possible, we will
 elicit judgments that are as accurate as possible, and
 therefore the graph will maximize a viewer’s ability to
 detect patterns and organize the quantitative information.
    In this section we use this mode of graph design to
 analyze several much-used graph forms and to construct
 replacements for some of them. The comparison of old
 graph forms and new ones provides another type of ex-
 periment that can be used to decide the validity of our
 approach.

##### PDF page 16, left column (x 0-326 pt) #####
                                                                      Cleveland and McGill:Graphical Perception

                                                                                                     ANGLE



                                                                          n     0




                                                                          0

                                                                      K
                                                                      0
                                                                      K
                                                                      K
                                                                      W
                                                                          n
                                                                          I




                                                                          0                          0         0
                                                                          4
                                                                           I
Downloaded by [Michigan State University] at 01:41 28 February 2015




                                                                                                                            0



                                                                                      20        40        60        eo          100
                                                                                                TRUE PERCENT
                                                                                    Figure 19. Position-angle experiment: Midrneans of e



                                                                      5.1 Dot Charts and Bar Charts as Replacements
                                                                          for Uvided Bar Charts and Pie Charts;
                                                                          Grouped Dot Charts and Grouped Bar Charts
                                                                          as Replacements for Divided Bar Charts
                                                                         For certain types of data structures, one cannot always
                                                                      use the most accurate elementary task, judging position
                                                                      along a common scale. But this is not true of the data
                                                                      represented in divided bar charts and pie charts; one can
                                                                      always represent such data along a common scale.
                                                                         A pie chart can always be replaced by a bar chart, thus
                                                                      replacing angle judgments by position judgments. In so
                                                                      doing it might be sensible in many cases to make the scale
                                                                      go from 0 to 100% so that the viewer can more readily
                                                                      appreciate the fraction that each bar is of 100%; but 0 to
                                                                      25 or 50% are also reasonable simple choices.
                                                                         Actually we prefer dot charts, which are introduced
                                                                      and discussed in Cleveland (1983), to bar charts. Figures
                                                                       16, 17, and 20 are dot charts. (The reasons for our pref-
                                                                      erence depart somewhat from our theme, so we refer the
                                                                      reader to Cleveland 1983.)
                                                                         Figure 22 is a pie chart. What is the ordering of the
                                                                      values of the five categories? The answer is not easy to
                                                                      find from the pie chart. From the dot chart in Figure 23,
                                                                      it is clear that the ordering from smallest to largest is A
                                                                      to E. This demonstrates the increase in ability to perceive
                                                                      patterns that results from the increased accuracy of per-
                                                                      ceptions based on position relative to that based on angle
                                                                      judgments.
                                                                         A divided bar chart can always be replaced by a
                                                                      grouped bar chart; again, we prefer a grouped dot chart
                                                                      (discussed in Cleveland 1982) to a grouped bar chart. To

##### PDF page 16, right column (x 326-648 pt) #####
                                                                   545

                                 POSITION




                                               0


         0 -

     K
     0
     K                                             0      0
     K
     W
         In,
         I

                                                              0



         r(

         O
         I I




                    20        40        60         80             100
                              TRUE PERCENT
errors against true percentages for two judgment types.



  illustrate the replacement of divided bar charts, consider
  the graph in Figure 24. What is the ordering of the five
  items in category A? As with the pie chart, making the
  judgments is not easy. Figure 25 is a grouped dot chart
  of the data in Figure 24. For\each of the categories A, B,
  and C, the totals and the item values are shown. Thus
  the many length judgments in the divided bar chart have
  been replaced by position judgments. It is clear that the
   order of the items in category A from smallest to largest
   is 1 to 5. Again, there is an increased ability to perceive
  patterns as a result of the increased accuracy of percep-
   tions.
      Our analysis has provided, in a sense, a resolution of
  the “Bar-Circle Debate,” as Kruskal (1982) refers to it.
  This was a controversy (Eells 1926; Croxton 1927; Crox-
  ton and Stryker 1927; von Huhn 1927) about whether the
  divided bar chart or the pie chart was superior for por-
  traying the parts of a whole. The contest appears to have
  ended in a draw. We conclude that neither graphical form
  should be used because other methods are demonstrably
  better.

  5.2 Showing Differences Directly for
      Curve-Difference Charts
    In the Playfair chart of Figure 6, the vertical distances
  between the two curves encode pictorially England’s bal-
  ance of payments with the East Indies. Thus the ele-
  mentary task in extracting the curve differences is per-
  ceiving length. It turns out that making such length
  judgments is inaccurate and even more difficult than on
  a divided bar chart. In fact the situation is so striking that

##### PDF page 17, left column (x 0-326 pt) #####
                                                                       546



                                                                      TYPE 1 ( P O S I T I O N )


                                                                      TYPE 2                (POSITION)




                                                                                                                         .
                                                                      TYPE 3                (POSITION)


                                                                               TYPE 4         (LENGTH)


                                                                               TYPE 5         (LENGTH)
Downloaded by [Michigan State University] at 01:41 28 February 2015




                                                                      TYPE 1 ( P O S I T I O N )


                                                                                   TYPE 2         (ANGLE)                                           .


                                                                                                                              I             I

                                                                                                                             -5            -4



                                                                        Figure 20. Error means,and 95% confidence intervals for judgm
                                                                      experiment (bottom).


                                                                      an experiment with subjects recording judgments is not
                                                                      necessary; it has taken only a few examples to convince
                                                                      us. One is shown in Figure 26. It is almost impossible to
                                                                      get even a rough idea of the behavior of the differences
                                                                      of the curves in the nine panels. The problem is that the
                                                                      brain wants to judge minimum distance between the

                                                                                        TYPE 1                       TYPE 2


                                                                      cn
                                                                      Z
                                                                      a
                                                                      w
                                                                      I
                                                                               -                            -i
                                                                                                                 I
                                                                      LL
                                                                      0
                                                                      u
                                                                      U
                                                                      z
                                                                               o                                                                +
                                                                                                                                                . . .

                                                                      W
                                                                      I
                                                                      I
                                                                      W
                                                                       I
                                                                      L L -
                                                                      L
                                                                      H
                                                                           L   I
                                                                                                                                  f
                                                                      n

                                                                                    1   2     3    4   5
                                                                                                                 L .
                                                                                                                 1   2   3        4   5         1



                                                                                                                                          TYPE O
                                                                                   Figure 27. Simultaneous 95% confidence intervals for diffe

##### PDF page 17, right column (x 326-648 pt) #####
                 1

     Journal of the American Statistical Associatlon, September 1984

                                                                       I
                                                                       I
                                                                       I
                                                                       I
                                                                       I
                                                                               I
                                                                                             i




-
                                                                       I
                                                                       I

                                           I               -       1
                                                                       I

                                                                       I
                                                                       I
                                                                       I




.
                                               t               -
                                                               -
                                                                   I
                                                                   1
                                                                       I
                                                                       I
                                                                       I
                                                                       I
                                                                       I
                                                                       I
                                                                       I
                                                                       I
                                                                       I
                                                                       I
                                                                       I
                                                                       I
                                                                       I

                                                                       I
                                                                       1
                                                                       I

                                                               l-4-l   I

                                                                       I
                                                                       I
                                                                       I
     -                                                                 I
                                                                       I
                                                                       I
             I               I                     I                   I                 I

             -3              -2                -1                      0                 1

                         ERROR
ment types in position-length experiment (top) and position-angle



     curves in different regions, and not vertical distance.
     Thus in each panel of Figure 26, one tends to see the
     curves getting closer, going from left to right. The actual
     vertical differences are plotted in Figure 27;'it is clear
     that Figure 26 has not conveyed even the grossest qual-
     itative behavior of the differences.

 TYPE 3                                TYPE 4                                      TYPE 5



I
     i
. . . . . . . . .                 . . . . . . . . . . .


                                                           i
                         1
 . . . .                         .    .    ,           .   ,               .   .     I           .   .




 2       3           4   5       1    2    3           4   5               1   2     3           4       5



 F JUOGEMENT
erences of judgment-type means in position-length experiment.

##### PDF page 18, left column (x 0-309 pt) #####
                                                                      Cleveland and McGill: Graphical Perception
Downloaded by [Michigan State University] at 01:41 28 February 2015




                                                                                              Figure 22. Pie chart.


                                                                        The same problem exists in the Playfair chart of Figure
                                                                      6, although a little less severely. Figure 28 contains a
                                                                      Cartesian graph of the differences, which does a far better
                                                                      job of portraying them because the elementary perceptual
                                                                      task is judging position along a common scale. For ex-
                                                                      ample, Figure 28 does a far better job of showing the
                                                                      occurrence of the rapid rise and descent of the balance
                                                                      against England around 1760; in Figure 6 this peak goes
                                                                      almost unnoticed unless considerable cognitive mental
                                                                      effort is expended. A sensible graphing of these data

                                                                                                     PERCENT

                                                                          0           5         10         15               20          25
                                                                           I           I         I             I            I           I



                                                                           ...........................................


                                                                                                     ...................         ..
                                                                                                     ................


                                                                               .................................


                                                                           ................................        .e


                                                                         0.0         0.5       1.0       1.5          2.0         2.5        3.0

                                                                                                      VALUES

                                                                                              Figure 23. Dot chart

##### PDF page 18, right column (x 309-648 pt) #####
                                                     547

     ?!-


     5!-

     m -


rn
W
3    I D -
-I
<
>

     *-

     N -




     o J

                  A                 B            C

                Figure 24. Divided bar chart.


would show the import-export curves and the differences
graphed directly, as in Figure 28.
   The remedy in this case seems simple: If differences
are to be conveyed, they should also be plotted on their
own Cartesian graph. This applies equally to the much-
used divided line chart, sometimes called an aggregate
line chart (Monkhouse and Wilkinson 1963). In such a
graph the amounts in various categories, say A to D, are
portrayed through time by plotting A, A + B, A + B +
C, and A + B + C + D against time as four curves.
Thus only A and the total, T = A + B + C + D, can
be judged by perception along a common scale, whereas
B, C, and D must be judged by perceiving vertical lengths
between two curves. Our perceptual theory and examples
strongly indicate that abandoning divided line charts and
plotting A, B, C, D, and T directly will lead to far more
accurate judgments.

5.3 Framed-Rectangle Charts as Replacements
    for Statistical Maps With Shading
   Statistical maps that use shading (or color saturation
or color hue) to encode a real variable, which Tukey
(1979) called patch maps, are commonly used for por-
traying measurements as a function of geographical lo-
cation. Figure 5 is one example. Murder rate is encoded
by the grid spacing, forming a kind of graph-paper col-
lage.
   To judge the values of a real variable encoded on a
patch map with shading, one must perform the elemen-
tary perceptual task of judging shading, which is at the
bottom of our perceptual hierarchy. One can move much
farther up the hierarchy by using the framed rectangles
discussed earlier to form a framed-rectangle chart. This

##### PDF page 19, left column (x 0-323 pt) #####
                                                                      548


                                                                      GROUP A TOTAL                 ....................
                                                                                AS                  ..........         .a



                                                                                A4                  ......... -0
                                                                                A3                  .........0
                                                                                A2                  . . . . . . . .. *      '



                                                                                A1                  . . . . . . .- 0
                                                                      GROUP 8 TOTAL                 .....................
                                                                                85                  .....0
                                                                                84
                                                                                83
                                                                                82

                                                                      GROUP C TOTAL
                                                                                        El
                                                                                                    .......a
                                                                                                    . . . . . -0
                                                                                                    ........     ..
                                                                                                    . . . . . . -0
                                                                                                    ....................
                                                                                c5                  . . . . . . . . -0
Downloaded by [Michigan State University] at 01:41 28 February 2015




                                                                                c4                  . . . . . -0
                                                                                c3                  ......... 0
                                                                                c2                  . . . . . -0
                                                                                c1                  ......-0
                                                                                                    I              I                    I

                                                                                                   0              2                     4

                                                                                                                                Figure 25.


                                                                      is illustrated in Figure 29 with the murder data portrayed
                                                                      in Figure 5 . Had we merely shown the bars without the
                                                                      frames, we would have had what Monkhouse and Wilk-
                                                                      inson (1963) called a statistical map with located bars; the
                                                                      elementary task would then have been perceiving length.
                                                                      The framed rectangles, which are one step higher in the
                                                                      hierarchy, lead to more accurate judgments, for the rea-
                                                                      sons discussed in Section 3.
                                                                         The framed-rectangle chart also solves another serious
                                                                      problem of statistical maps with shading. On such patch
                                                                      maps the states are treated in a very uneven way because
                                                                      of their different areas. For example, in Figure 5 the total
                                                                      amount of black for each state is actually encoding

                                                                                     number of murders
                                                                                                       x area.
                                                                                      number of people

                                                                      The result is that Texas is imposing and Rhode Island is
                                                                      hard to see.
                                                                        There is another, more subtle perceptual problem that
                                                                      arises on a patch map with shading. In Figure 5 , for ex-
                                                                      ample, one tends to see contiguous clusters of states: The
                                                                      two most prominent clusters are the north central states
                                                                      (North Dakota, South Dakota, Nebraska, Minnesota,
                                                                      Iowa, and Wisconsin) and New England (Maine, New

##### PDF page 19, right column (x 323-648 pt) #####
Journal of the American Statistical Association, September f984


............................




.............              -0




................                -0




              I                 I            I              I

             6              8              10              12
   VALUES
Dot chart with grouping.


 Hampshire, Vermont, Massachusetts, Connecticut, and
 Rhode Island).
    Part of the reason why the clustering occurs so strongly
 on the patch map is the reduction in the accuracy of the
 perceived quantitative information; values group together
 because we cannot visually differentiate them. Thus the
 encoding of the data on the patch map provides a kind
 of visual data reduction scheme in which noise is reduced
 and a signal comes through. Unfortunately the signal is
 of poor quality, since the clustering is subject to the va-
 garies of the shading scheme. For example, the deep
 South states (Texas, Louisiana, Mississippi, Alabama,
 and Georgia) deserve to cluster together as forcefully as
 the New England states but do not because our sensitivity
 to differences at the high end of the scale appears to be
 greater than at the low end of the scale. The deep South
 states contain five of the six largest rates, and their range
 is 3.2. The range for New England is 2.7. Furthermore
 the largest deep South value (Louisiana) is 1.4 units larger
 than the next largest value in the cluster, and the smallest
 New England value (New Hampshire) is 1.3 units'less
 than the next smallest value; but Louisiana appears to
 stand out in its cluster much more forcefully than does
 New Hampshire.
    If we want to perform data reduction, eliminating noise
 to allow a signal to come through, then we can use a

##### PDF page 20, left column (x 0-319 pt) #####
                                                                      Cleveland and McGIil: Graphical Perception
Downloaded by [Michigan State University] at 01:41 28 February 2015




                                                                        0                  5   0             5    0              5


                                                                                    Figure 26. Curve-difference chart


                                                                      sensible numerical scheme together with a higher accu-
                                                                      racy chart such as the framed-rectangle chart. One pro-
                                                                      cedure, suggested by Tukey (1979), would be to smooth

                                                                                                             CHART OF BALAN


                                                                        0.8




                                                                        0. 6




                                                                        0.4




                                                                        0.2




                                                                        0.0
                                                                                       I                          I

                                                                                    1700                         1720
                                                                                                                        Figure 28. Pl

##### PDF page 20, right column (x 319-648 pt) #####
                                                         549




    0             5   0                 5       0          5



                Figure 27. Curve differences.


 the variable as a function of geographical location and
 portray smoothed values. Another somewhat crude, but
 reasonable data reduction procedure is to group the data

NCE AGAINST ENGLAND




        I                    I                       I

  1740                    1760                      1780
layfair data.

##### PDF page 21, left column (x 0-325 pt) #####
                                                                      550


                                                                                             o = O           1 = 4           0 =
Downloaded by [Michigan State University] at 01:41 28 February 2015




                                                                                               MURDER RATES PER 100.
                                                                                                                     Figure 29. Frame



                                                                      into equal-length intervals and portray the midpoints.
                                                                      This has been done in Figure 30, and now the north cen-
                                                                      tral states, northern New England, and the deep South
                                                                      form more clear-cut visual clusters than in Figure 29.
                                                                         Another data reduction technique, a visual one, that
                                                                      results in effective but somewhat fuzzier clusters is sim-
                                                                      ply to reduce the vertical resolution of the framed rec-
                                                                      tangles by reducing their heights. This has been done in
                                                                      Figure 31; clusters of states now appear to form more
                                                                      readily than in Figure 29. It should be noted that this
                                                                      technique works because the reduction prevents one from
                                                                      optically detecting certain differences. In general one
                                                                      would not expect graph size to be a major factor in graph-
                                                                      ical perception until things were so small that differences
                                                                      would be optically blurred. Because the graph elements
                                                                      in our experiments were sufficiently large, as graph ele-
                                                                      ments usually are, size was not a factor that we needed
                                                                      to take into account. It is fortunate that this was so; other-
                                                                      wise the distance the viewer held the graph from his or
                                                                      her eyes would have been a factor.
                                                                         Our conclusion about patch maps agrees with Tukey’s
                                                                      (1979), who left little doubt about his opinions by stating,
                                                                      “I am coming to be less and less satisfied with the set of
                                                                      maps that some dignify by the name statistical map and

##### PDF page 21, right column (x 325-648 pt) #####
 Journal of the American Statistical Association, September 1984

 8        0 = 1 2           (=Is




                             Y



.000 POPULATION, 1978
ed-rectanglechart.



  that I would gladly revile with the name patch map” (p.
  792).

  5.4 Graphs for Data Analysis
    The graphical forms discussed so far in this section are
  used more in data presentation than in data analysis. But
  our perceptual theory can serve equally well as a guide
  for designing graphical methods for statistical analyses.
  Triple Scatterplo ts
     The triple scatterplot is a useful tool in data analysis
  for understanding the structure of three-dimensional data.
  Figure 9 shows one implementation; perceiving the val-
  ues encoded by the circles requires the elementary task
  of judging area. Anscombe (1973) has suggested another
  scheme for typewriter terminals and printers in which
  overplotted characters, increasing in size and amount of
  black, encode the third variable.
     In a sense the framed-rectangle chart is a triple scat-
  terplot; thus one might think in terms of a general triple
  scatterplot procedure in which the third variable is coded
  by framed rectangles. But for general data analytic pur-
  poses, this is unlikely to work well because of a practical

##### PDF page 22, left column (x 0-321 pt) #####
                                                                      Cleveland and McGIII: Graphical Perceptlon

                                                                      difficulty-overlapping symbols. For the statistical map
                                                                      it was easy to avoid overlap, but for general scatterplots,
                                                                      where points can get very crowded, the problem would
                                                                      often be insurmountable.
                                                                         Circles can overlap a lot and still permit perception of
                                                                      circle. Part of the reason for this is that overlapping cir-
                                                                      cles tend to form regions that do not look like circles, so
                                                                      the individuals stand out. Since squares do not have this
                                                                      property, overlap becomes a problem much more
                                                                      quickly.
                                                                         Our perceptual theory suggests that the third variable
                                                                      be encoded by line length so that a more accurate ele-
                                                                      mentary perceptual task can be performed. We have not
                                                                      experimented with this procedure enough to know
                                                                      whether line overlap is a lesser or greater problem than
                                                                      circle overlap.
                                                                      Hanging Rootograms and Slopes of Normal
                                                                      Probabiliry Plots
Downloaded by [Michigan State University] at 01:41 28 February 2015




                                                                        It can be said that John Tukey has already implemented
                                                                      a part of our perceptual theory by recommending the
                                                                      redesign of two common statistical graphical methods.
                                                                      The hanging rootogram (Tukey 1972) modifies the usual
                                                                      method of superimposing a normal density on a histo:


                                                                                           0    =   0-4        1   = 4-8             0




                                                                                               MURDER RATES PER 1.00.
                                                                                                                   Figure 30.Framed

##### PDF page 22, right column (x 321-648 pt) #####
                                                            551

  gram, converting the perceptual task from judging length
  to judging position along a common scale. Tukey (1962)
  also suggested modifying normal probability plots by
  plotting the slopes of lines connecting the median point
  (i.e., data median vs. the median of the normal, which is
  usually taken to be zero) with other points on the plot;
  the slope from the median point to the point associated
  with the ith largest order statistic is plotted against i. The
  viewer of an ordinary normal probability plot must judge
  whether the points form a straight line pattern, so Tukey’s
  modification converts judgment of direction (slope) to
  judgment of position along a common scale.
    Symbols for Multidimensional Data
       One area of statistical graphics that has received a lot
    of attention is designing symbols for representing multi-
    dimensional data. Examples are polygons, Anderson
    glyphs, faces, profiles, and Kleiner-Hartigan trees
    (Chambers et al. 1983). Let us consider faces. Judging
    the values of the individual encoded variables requires
    five elementary perceptual tasks: position along non-
    aligned scales, length, direction, area, and amount of cur-
    vature. Thus extracting the quantitative information re-
    quires substantial perceptual processing; and there is no


0     =   8-12         1   =   12-16




                               Y

 000 POPULATION,               1978
d-rectangle chart.

##### PDF page 23, left column (x 0-325 pt) #####
                                                                      552
Downloaded by [Michigan State University] at 01:41 28 February 2015




                                                                                                                             V
                                                                                              MURDER RATES PER 100,0
                                                                                                                   Figure 31. Frame

                                                                      easy and direct elementary task that one can perform to
                                                                      allow the study of the relationship between two variables,
                                                                      as for a Cartesian plot. For this reason faces and the other
                                                                      symbolic displays tend not to tell us much about the ge-
                                                                      ometry of the multidimensional point cloud. Fixed or
                                                                      data-driven projections of the points onto planes (Tukey
                                                                      and Tukey 1981) appear to be more useful; each projec-
                                                                      tion is portrayed by a scatterplot, so the elementary tasks
                                                                      performed are judgments of position along a common
                                                                      scale and direction (slope). Of course the integration of
                                                                      the projections requires complex perceptual and cogni-
                                                                      tive mental tasks.
                                                                            6. PERSPECTIVESl REALISM, AND CRITICISM
                                                                         For some the word theory implies a detailed, system-
                                                                      atic, and comprehensive description of a subject. Such a
                                                                      meaning would, of course, be ludicrous for the tentative
                                                                      first step in this article. For us the identification and or-
                                                                      dering of the perceptual tasks is a theory in a less re-
                                                                      strictive sense: It is a set of plausible statements that
                                                                      describe a phenomenon-the relative accuracy with
                                                                      which various graphical forms convey quantitative infor-
                                                                      mation.
                                                                         We expect that our theory, like all theories, will
                                                                      undergo much revision as new experimental information

##### PDF page 23, right column (x 325-648 pt) #####
 Journal of the American Statistical Association, September 1984




V                          b
000 POPULATION,               1978
ed-rectangle chart.

  is accumulated. The outcomes of the two experiments
  reported here were correctly predicted by the theory; po-
  sition judgments were more accurate than length judg-
  ments and angle judgments. The position-length exper-
  iment suggests, however, that a revision in the theory
  might be appropriate. Although Judgment Types 1-3 in-
  volved judgments of position along a common scale,
  namely the vertical scale of the bar charts, the horizontal
  distance between the graphical elements being judged
  varied from 0 cm for Type 1 to 2.8 cm for Type 2 to 5.6
  cm for Type 3; Figures 16 and 17 show that errors in-
  creased in going from Type 1 to Type 2 to Type 3. This
  suggests that the elementary task of judging position be
  expanded into a continuum of tasks for which accuracy
  is conjectured to decrease with increasing distance be-
  tween the graphical elements encoding the data, where
  distance is measured perpendicular to the axis along
  which the data are plotted. Not surprisingly, after just
  two experiments a revision in the theory appears nec-
  essary.
     The ordering of the perceptual tasks does not provide
  a complete prescription for how to make a graph. Rather,
  it provides a set of guidelines that must be used with
  judgment in designing a graph. Many other factors, such
  as what functions of the data to plot, must be taken into

##### PDF page 24, left column (x 0-311 pt) #####
                                                                      Cleveland and McGill: Graphical Perception

                                                                      account in the design of a graph. A discussion of this is
                                                                      given in Chambers et al. (1983, Ch. 8).
                                                                         We have used elementary perceptual task to describe
                                                                      the basic elements involved in our theory. It may have
                                                                      been more appropriate to call them elementary graphical
                                                                       encodings, emphasizing that they are basic ways of en-
                                                                       coding data on graphs. We cannot realistically claim to
                                                                      have isolated 10 basic, independent perceptual tasks.
                                                                      Each task is really a complex set of tasks, and there is
                                                                      much overlap. For example, it might be argued that judg-
                                                                      ing positions along nonaligned scales really involves mak-
                                                                      ing two length judgments, one from each end of the axis.
                                                                      Despite these shortcomings, we have used elementary
                                                                      perceptual task to emphasize that we are studying the
                                                                      decoding process of the human-graph interface.
                                                                         One substantial danger in performing graphical per-
                                                                      ceptual experiments is that asking people to record judg-
                                                                      ments will make them perform judgments differently from
                                                                      the way they perform them when they look at graphs in
                                                                      real life. Subjects will try to get the right answer and might
Downloaded by [Michigan State University] at 01:41 28 February 2015




                                                                      perform much more highly cognitive tasks than the basic
                                                                      perceptual tasks they perform in real life. We tried to
                                                                      guard against this in various ways in our experiments:
                                                                      One way was to encourage subjects to work quickly,
                                                                      much as they might in looking at a graph in real life.
                                                                      Another was to omit tick marks and labels on axes except
                                                                      at the extremes. For example, consider the bar chart in
                                                                      the right panel of Figure 3. Had we put many tick marks
                                                                      and labels on the vertical axis, subjects could have judged
                                                                      ratios by reading values off the axis and performing a
                                                                      mental division. Although some people may perform such
                                                                      an operation in real life, it is not the basic perceptual
                                                                      processing from geometrical information that we wanted
                                                                      to study and that we conjecture is the main way viewers
                                                                      judge ratios in real life. We have no proof that our lab-
                                                                      oratory results are realistic and work in the field, but it
                                                                      appears plausible that this is so.
                                                                         Whatever the limitations of the current theory, it ap-
                                                                      pears to have led to some useful results. Its application
                                                                      to some of the most-used charts in graphical communi-
                                                                      cation (bar charts, divided bar charts, pie charts, and sta-
                                                                      tistical maps with shading) has led to replacements (dot
                                                                      charts, dot charts with grouping, and framed-rectangle
                                                                      charts). We do not lightly recommend the dismissal of
                                                                      some of the most popular graph forms, but it appears to
                                                                      be the inescapable conclusion of this analysis of graph
                                                                      design. If progress is to be made in graphics, we must be
                                                                      prepared to set aside old procedures when better ones
                                                                      are developed, just as is done in other areas of science.
                                                                            [Received May 1983. Revised October 1983.1

                                                                                               REFERENCES
                                                                      AMERICAN NATIONAL STANDARDS INSTITUTE (1979), Time-
                                                                       Series Charts, New York: The American Society of Mechanical En-
                                                                       gineers.
                                                                      ANSCOMBE, F.J. (1973), “Graphs in Statistical Analysis,” The Amer-
                                                                       ican Statistician, 27, 17-21.
                                                                      BERTIN, J. (1973), Semiologie Graphique (2nd ed.), Paris: Gauthier-
                                                                       Villars.

##### PDF page 24, right column (x 311-648 pt) #####
                                                                  553

BAIRD, J.C. (1970), Psychophysical Analysis of Visual Space, New
  York: Pergamon Press.
BAIRD, J.C., and NOMA, E. (1978), Fundamentals of Scaling and
  Psychophysics, New York: John Wiley.
CHAMBERS, J.M., CLEVELAND, W.S., KLEINER, B., and
  TUKEY, P.A. (1983), Graphical Methods for Data Analysis, Bel-
  mont, Calif.: Wadsworth.
CLEVELAND, W.S. (1979), “Robust Locally Weighted Regression
  and Smoothing Scatterplots,” Journal of the American Statistical As-
  sociation, 74, 829-836.
         (1983), “Graphical Methods for Data Presentation: Dot Charts,
  Full Scale Breaks, and Multi-based Logging,” Bell Laboratories
  memorandum.
CLEVELAND, W.S., HARRIS, C.S., and McGILL, R. (1983), “Ex-
  periments on Quantitative Judgments of Graphs and Maps,” Bell Sys-
  tem Technical Journal, 62, 1659-1674.
COX, D.R. (1978), “Some Remarks on the Role in Statistics of Graph-
  ical Methods,” Applied Statistics, 27, 4-9.
CROXTON, F.E. (1927), “Further Studies in the Graphic Use of Circles
  and Bars 11: Some Additional Data,” Journal of the American Sta-
  tistical Association, 22, 36-39.
CROXTON, F.E., and STRYKER, R.E. (1927), “Bar Charts Versus
  Circle Diagrams,” Journal of the American Statistical Association,
  22, 473-482.
EELLS, W.C. (1926), “The Relative Merits of Circles and Bars for
  Representing Component Parts,” Journal of the American Statistical
  Association, 21, 119-132.
EFRON, B. (1982), The Jackknife, the Bootstrap, and Other Resam-
  pling Plans, Philadelphia: Society for Industrial and Applied Math-
   ematics.
EHRENBERG, A.S.C. (1975), Data Reduction: Analyzing and Inter-
  preting Statistical Data, New York: John Wiley.
FEINBERG, B.M., and FRANKLIN, C.A. (1975), Social Graphics
  Bibliography, Washington, D.C.: Bureau of Social Science Research.
GALE, N., and HALPERIN, W.C. (1982), “A Case for Better Graph-
   ics: The Unclassed Choropleth Map,” The American Statistician, 36,
   330-336.
GREGORY, R.L. (1%6), Eye and Brain, the Psychology of Seeing,
   New York: McGraw-Hill.
JULESZ, B. (1981), “A Theory of Preattentive Texture Discrimination
   Based on First-Order Statistics of Textons,” Biological Cybernetics,
   41, 131-138.
          (in press), “Toward an Axiomatic Theory of Preattentive Vi-
   sion,” Dyanmic Aspects of Neocortical Function, eds. Edelman,
   Cowan, and Gall, New York: John Wiley.
KRUSKAL, W.H. (1975), “Visions of Maps and Graphs,” in Auto-
   Carto II, Proceedings of the International Symposium on Computer
   Assisted Cartography, ed. J. Kavaliunas, Washington, D.C.: U.S.
   Bureau of the Census and American Congress on Survey and M a p
   ping, 27-36.
           (1982), “Criteria for Judging Statistical Graphics,” Utilitas
   Mathematica, Ser. B, 21B, 283-310.
MARCUS, A., MARCUS, S.,REINECK, J., and REINECK, G.
   (1980), Graphic Design and Information Graphics, Siggraph Tutorial
   Notes, New York: Association for Computing Machinery.
MARR, D., and NISHIHARA, H.K. (1978), “Representation and Rec-
   ognition of the Spatial Organization of Three-Dimensional Shapes,”
   Proceeding of the Royal Society of London, Ser. B, 200, 269-294.
MONKHOUSE, F.J., and WILKINSON, H.R. (1%3), Maps andDia-
   grams, London: Methuen.
MOSTELLER, F., and TUKEY, J.W. (1977), Data Analysis and
   Regression, Reading, Mass.: Addison-Wesley.
PINKER, S. (1982), “A Theory of Graph Comprehension,” Occasional
   Paper No. 15, Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Center for Cognitive Sciences.
PLAYFAIR, W. (1786), The Commercial and Political Atlas, London.
 ROBINSON, A.H., SALE, R.D., and MORRISON, J. (1978), Elements
    of Cartography, New York: John Wiley.
 SCHEFFE, H. (1959), The Analysis of Variance, New York: John
    Wiley.
 SCHMID, C.F., and SCHMID, S.E. (1979), Handbookof Graphic Pres-
    entation, New York: John Wiley.
 STEVENS, S . S . (1975), Psychophysics, New York: John Wiley.
 TUFTE, E. (1983), The Visual Display of Quantitative Information,
    Cheshire, Conn.: Graphics Press.       ‘
 TUKEY, J.W. (1%2), “The Future of Data Analysis,” Annals of Math-
    ematical Statistics, 33, 1-67.
          (19721, “Some Graphic and Semi-Graphic Displays,” in Statis-

##### PDF page 25, left column (x 0-340 pt) #####
                                                                      554

                                                                       tical Papers in Honor of George W . Snedecor, ed. T.A. Bancroft,
                                                                       Ames, Iowa: Iowa State University Press, 292-316.
                                                                             (1977), Exploratory Data Analysis, Reading, Mass.: Addison-
                                                                       Wesley.
                                                                             (1979), “Methodology and the Statistician’s Responsibility for
                                                                       BOTH Accuracy AND Relevance,” Journal ofthe American Stntis-
                                                                       tical Association, 74, 786-793.
Downloaded by [Michigan State University] at 01:41 28 February 2015

##### PDF page 25, right column (x 340-648 pt) #####
Journal of the American Statistical Association,September 1984

 TUKEY, P.A., and TUKEY, J. W. (1981), “Graphical Display of Data
   Sets in 3 or More Dimensions,” in Interpreting Multivariate Data,
   ed. V. Barnett, Chichester, U.K.: John Wiley, 189-275.
 VON HUHN, R. (1927), “Further Studies in the Graphic Use of Circles
   and Bars I: A Discussion of Eells’ Experiment,” Journal ofthe Amer-
   ican Statistical Association, 22, 31-36.
