University of Central Florida



Institute for Simulation and Training                                                                                                 Research Report



Derivation Of New Readability Formulas
(Automated Readability Index, Fog Count And
Flesch Reading Ease Formula) For Navy Enlisted
Personnel
1-1-1975

J. Peter Kincaid

Robert P. Fishburne Jr.

Richard L. Rogers

Brad S. Chissom




Find similar works at: https://stars.library.ucf.edu/istlibrary

University of Central Florida Libraries http://library.ucf.edu



Recommended Citation
Kincaid, J. Peter; Fishburne, Robert P. Jr.; Rogers, Richard L.; and Chissom, Brad S., "Derivation Of New Readability Formulas
(Automated Readability Index, Fog Count And Flesch Reading Ease Formula) For Navy Enlisted Personnel" (1975). Institute for
Simulation and Training. 56.
https://stars.library.ucf.edu/istlibrary/56

This Research Report is brought to you for free and open access by the Digital Collections at STARS. It has been accepted for inclusion in Institute for
Simulation and Training by an authorized administrator of STARS. For more information, please contact lee.dotson@ucf.edu.
     NAVAL TECHNICAL TRAINING COMMAND



          RESEARCH BRANCH REPORT 8-75


DERIVATION OF NEW READABILITY FORMULAS ( AUTOMATED
 READABILITY INDEX , FOG COUNT AND FLESCH READING
    EASE FORMULA ) FOR NAVY ENLISTED PERSONNEL
                 FEBRUARY 1975




              APPROVED FOR PUBLIC RELEASE
                 DISTRIBUTION UNLIMITED




       CHIEF OF NAVAL TECHNICAL TRAINING
   NAVAL AIR STATION MEMPHIS – MILLINGTON, TN
Research Branch Report 8-75                                                  February 1975




 DERIVATION OF NEW READABILITY FORMULAS (Automated Readability Index, Fog
      Count and Flesch Reading Ease Formula) FOR NAVY ENLISTED PERSONNEL


                                             by
         J. Peter Kincaid                                Lieutenant Robert P. Fishburne, Jr.

    Georgia Southern College                                       MSC, USNR



        Richard L. Rogers                                         Brad S. Chissom

    Georgia Southern College                                 Georgia Southern College




                       Approved for Public Release: Distribution Unlimited




                              Chief of Naval Technical Training
                               Naval Air Station Memphis (75)
                                Millington, Tennessee 38054
                     Submitted by

       N. J. Kerr, Ed.D., Head, Research Branch


                     Approved by

             T. F. MULLANE, Captain, USN
Assistant for Training Methods, Research, and Evaluation
                 •       , • ,

       ,   .,-~'"
                    ..   ,
                             ,       ..,                      ."            .DAU·R&D
                                                                             J            , ••
                                                                                          . wo                    ,."              ,,
                                                                                                            .:'"' "." ""«"0"
  Chief of Na val Technical Training


             '"''
  Derivation of New Readebility Formulas (~utomate~ Readability Index, Fog Count and
  Flesch Reading Ease Formula) for tl..vy Enlisted Personnel

la. " r:.c:"'"~''''' "0,,,1 (r,~
                      ,
                                                         '"   .,..,
             ,     ;
        "
  J. Peter Kincaid, Robe~t P. Fishburo o. Jr •• LT USC USNR. Richard L. Rogers, .and
  Brad S. ChlBsom

               . ,.75
                                 , "".
                                                                             4.
                                                                          lb. ,
                                                                                                             I I.
  N61339~74-D-0082
  • • ""O~'CT NO .                                                          RRa 8-75
  ..                                                                        ."    .~.,           "                        • .. _ ". . . .;~H


  • ,           ,
  Approved for public r c!.c..aoe; 41l1tr:f.b lltion unU.I"'..:1ted

 ,.                                                                                         ,                 ,
                                                                            Chief of Naval Technical Training


           'l'll'rae readability fot"1llul •• werp- recalculated to be IIlOre suitable for tTavy use.
   the three formulas are the Autom£ted Readability Index (ARl), Fog Count, and Flesch
   Rea~ing Ease Formula.   They vere derived from test results of 531 Navy e~11sted
   personnel. enrolled in four technical training schools. Personnel were tested : for
   their reading comprehecsion level according to the comprehension section of the
   Gatea-McGinitie reading test. At the same time, they were tested for their compre-
 . hension of 18 passages taken from Rate Training Manuals. Scores on the reading
   test and training material passages allowed the calculation of the grade level of
   the passages. Thb scaled reeding grade level is based on Navy pereonnel reading
   Na~ train ~& material and co~r~hendin& it.     Thus, the three recalculated formulas
    (derived using multiple regression techniques) are specificall y for Navy use.
   more, the formulas are directly interchangeable because they were all calculated using
   the same data bnse4 That i8, the ARr can be used when new material is being written,
   as the new material is usually typed anyway. The Flesch Formula is preferable when
    the Automated Flesch Count machine 1s available and existing material i& being
   graded for readin~ difficulty. The Fog Count can be used when no equipment is
   available to aid the count. The use of these readability formulas should help the
   undentaading of Navy training material when this. material must be read by enliste.d
   personnel.




 DO ,'~o~·.. 1473                        (PAGE. .1 ) .         ,      .                                                             ,
                                                                                         Unclassified
 SIN 0102.014.6700                                                                                   Sec..,itv Class ifica ti on
     Uncb.ss1 •"ied                                                                            .
             hcurity CI . . .Uice\i ....
    "-
                                      "It" _nos
                                                    .
                                                             "01. 1:    ..
                                                                  L.NK ..

                                                                                           ..
                                                                                  L . N"I ..

                                                                             .. OLIt
                                                                                                      L'Nl( <:
                                                                                                   ~. ,

                                                                                                             "'
     AU  (Automated Readability Index)
     Cloze test
     FJP (Farr-Jenkins- Paterson)
     Flesch Formula
     rog Count
     FORCASr Formula
     Readability
                                                                                                                  I
     P~ading Comprehension
     Reading Level
     technical Publications




,I                                                                                                                •
                                                                                                                  1
I                                                                                                                 1
I                                                                                                                 I
I                                                                                                                 I
I                                                                                                                 I
i•                                                                                                                I

,i

I

                                                                                                                  I



DD , :~~·.. 1473                           laACK)
                                                        ..
                                 ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This effort, "Development of Navy Readability Indices" has been funded by the Chief of Naval
Education and Training through a subcontract granted by Florida State University (N61339-74-
D-0082). A number of individuals have been most helpful in completing this effort. Dr. W. W.
McClellan and Mr. Walter Birdsal (NETPDC) chose the rate training manuals which served as
the basis of the cloze reading tests. LCDR Robert Biersner, Mr, Gary Bunde, and colleagues
(CNETS) offered several valuable suggestions about the experimental design. Dr. Harry Cowart
and Dr. Barbara Carter gave suggestions about the standardized reading test. Mr. Charles
Hussung (ADJ School, NAS Memphis), ATCS John Batey (AVA School, NAS Memphis),
CW02 Larry Harwood (BE/E School, Great Lakes Naval Training Center), and LCDR John
Persley (GM School, Great Lakes Naval Training Center) arranged for the testing of subjects.
Finally, Mr. William McDaniel, Mr. Robert Osgood and Mr. Kirk Hall served as research
assistants.
                                          SUMMARY


       Three readability formulas were recalculated to be more suitable for Navy use. The three
formulas are the Automated Readability Index (ARI), Fog Count, and Flesch Reading Ease
Formula. They were derived from test results of 531 Navy enlisted personnel enrolled in four
technical training schools at two Navy bases: Naval Air Station at Memphis, and Great Lakes
Navy Training Center. Personnel were tested for their reading comprehension level according to
the comprehension section of the Gates-McGinitie reading test. At the same time, they were
tested for their comprehension of 18 passages taken from Rate Training Manuals. The average
General Classification Test Score of the sample (54.7) is very close to the average GCT of the
entire population of Navy enlisted personnel (54.3) indicating that the results should generalize
to the entire population of Navy enlisted personnel. Scores on the reading test and training
material passages allowed the calculation of the grade level of the passages. This scaled reading
grade level is based on Navy personnel reading Navy training material and comprehending it.
Thus, the three recalculated formulas (derived using multiple regression techniques) are
specifically for Navy use. Furthermore, the formulas are directly interchangeable because they
were all calculated using the same data base. That is, the ARI can be used when new material is
being written, as the new material is usually typed anyway. The Flesch Formula is preferable
when the Automated Flesch Count machine is available and existing material is being graded for
reading difficulty. The Fog Count can be used when no equipment is available to aid the count.
A simplified equation was calculated for both the ARI and Flesch Formula. Their use gives
almost exactly the same result as the more complex formulas, and because they are easier to use,
they should be preferable. Actually, there is only an error of about .1 grade level in using the
simplified formulas and this is trivial.
       A number of recent studies have suggested that readability formulas for military use
should contain only a word difficulty measure, such as average word length or average syllables
per word. Results of the present study indicate that a sentence difficulty measure adds accuracy
in predicting how difficult a piece of Navy training material is to comprehend. Thus, the
recommended formulas also contain a measure of sentence difficulty (average sentence length).
       The use of these readability formulas should help the understanding of Navy training
material when this material must be read by enlisted personnel. Currently, such material is
written at a level well above the reading ability level of the personnel that must read it.
Estimates of the average reading ability level of Navy enlisted personnel range between the ninth
and tenth grades. Readability level of the material should be kept at the reading ability level of
the personnel using it.
iii
                             TABLE OF CONTENTS


Acknowledgments                                        i
Summary                                               ii

Introduction                                          1
Method                                                6
Results                                               11
Discussion and Conclusions                            18
References                                            21
Appendix A (Eighteen Test Passages Taken From Rate    23
            Training Manuals)

Appendix B (Instructions for Recalculated Formulas)   32
                                        INTRODUCTION

        The ability of military personnel to understand narrative technical material has for many

years been a problem. Studies conducted by all three military services have verified that the

material that must be comprehended to do the job is written at a level of difficulty well above the

reading ability of the man reading the material (Kincaid, 1967; Smith & Kincaid, 1970; Klare,

1963; Caylor, Sticht, Fox & Ford, 1972; Carver, 1973a, Duffy & Nugent, 1974). The effects of

faulty communication are well known and disastrous. One recent Air Force study (Johnson,

Relova & Stafford, 1972) has traced many costly errors to the reading difficulty level of the

instructions in manuals to be followed. The more difficult the material, the more mistakes were

made.

        There are two basic ways to improve comprehension of written material by Navy

personnel. The first is to improve the reading ability of the man using the material either by

remedial instruction or by selecting men who have high reading ability. Remedial instruction

requires a great deal of effort for significant gains in reading ability to be achieved. Selecting

personnel with high reading abilities is getting progressively more difficult both because the

average high school graduate is not reading as well as ten years ago and because of the new all-

volunteer concept in the military services. Carver (l973b) estimates that the average reading

ability of Navy enlisted personnel is about the ninth grade. Pinning (1974) estimated this reading

ability to be 10.0 and projected that it would fall to 9.0 by the 1979-1982 time-frame. Duffy and

Nugent (1974) measured the reading ability of 3,565 June, 1974, enlistees at San Diego. The

mean reading ability according to the Gates-McGinitie Reading Test, Form D (for grades 4-6)

was 9.8.
      The other basic method of dealing with the problem is by making the material easier to

read. One way of doing this is by using readability formulas. Readability formulas have been

used as a method of estimating reading according to a grade level measure. The Army and Air

Force have used these to good advantage in making technical material easier to read. Kincaid,

Yasutake and Geiselhart (1967) and Smith and Kincaid (1970) validated one readability formula,

the Automated Readability Index (ARI) for use with Air Force technical material. Air Force

enlisted personnel found technical material written at the eighth grade level of difficulty

according to the ARI easier to understand. This validation was used as the basis for requiring

that all narrative sections of the C-5A Technical Orders be written at no more than the tenth

grade level of difficulty according to the ARI.

       Most readability formulas have been derived and validated on the general population.

The Flesch Reading Ease Formula, the most widely validated and used of all readability

formulas, has never been validated for use by military personnel. Caylor, et al., (1972) state that

existing readability formulas have validity coefficients of about .70 for predicting the

performance of school children on reading comprehension tests. Thus, they account for about 50

percent of the variability and this figure is probably lower with Navy enlistees reading and

comprehending Navy training material. Prior to this study, we simply did not know how

appropriate this readability formula or a number of others may be for Navy reading material with

its characteristic style, format, and heavy use of technical words. It appears likely that the

repeating of technical words in Navy technical material would tend to inflate the computed

readability level beyond the actual difficulty experienced by the technician or technical training

student reading the material.


                                                  2
       A unique approach to the problem of deriving readability formulas specifically for

military populations was undertaken by HumRRO (Caylor et al., 1972), who developed the

FORCAST formula for the Army. This formula was derived from the testing of Army enlisted

personnel. It does not offer the advantages of easy automation because it is based on a count of

one-syllable words in a passage which is done most easily by hand. However the criterion

measure approach used in the study can be used to recalculate existing readability formulas. In

the study, a sample of training material was selected representing essential job reading material.

Then a 395 subject sample of enlisted personnel was tested with a standardized reading test to

assess the grade level of reading ability of each subject. The particular reading test used was the

USAFI Reading Achievement Test III, Form A, Abbreviated Edition (a special printing of the

Metropolitan Achievement Test, Advanced Battery). These same subjects were tested for their

understanding of the selected reading passages using the cloze procedure. Every fifth word was

left out and the subject's task was to fill it in. A passage was assigned a particular grade level in

the case in which 50 percent of the subjects reading at that particular grade level scored 35

percent or better on the cloze test. Once the passages were graded, the multiple regression

technique was used to derive a new readability formula specifically for Army use.

       Readability researchers using multiple choice items have employed a criterion of 75

percent correct to indicate that a passage has been comprehended (e.g., Flesch, 1948). Rankin,

and Culhane (1969) have shown that a score on the cloze test of 35 – 40 percent is comparable to

a score of 75 percent on multiple choice questions. Since the cloze test is objectively prepared

while the multiple choice items are at least partly subjectively chosen, the cloze method offers a

real advantage.


                                                  3
       The purpose of the present research project is to modify three readability formulas to

correspond with Navy needs. Each is potentially useful in grading the reading difficulty of Navy

narrative materials under varying conditions. Using the criterion approach developed by Caylor,

et al., (1972), the ARI Fog Count and Flesch Reading Ease Formulas can be modified by

recalculating new regression formulas. As a result, the three formulas will grade a given Navy

narrative passage nearly the same and can be used interchangeably. This is an important result

because the three formulas have varying degrees of usefulness in varying situations. For

example, the ARI can be used when draft material is being typed or computer processed. Klare,

Rowe, St. John, and Stolurow (1969) also have developed computer programs for calculating

the Flesch Reading Ease Formula and the Fog Count. The count of syllables, used in both of

these formulas, is accurate to within one percent. The ARI is calculated using a modified

typewriter and a typed copy is produced as the formula factors are gathered. The Flesch Reading

Ease Score and Fog Count can be calculated without special equipment. While the Flesch

Reading Ease score has been more widely used, it takes longer to take the counts, if done

manually, than the Fog Count according to Thomas, Hartley, and Kincaid (in press). However,

Kincaid and McDaniel (1974) have developed a new machine automating the Flesch count. This

machine cuts the time to take Flesch counts almost in half as compared with the manual taking of

the count (McDaniel, 1974). Also the accuracy of the Automated Flesch Count as inferred from

reliability is better than the manual method according to this study. The taking of both Flesch

and Fog Counts does not require any special skills, such as proficiency in typing as is required to

use the ARI. Also, the Fog Count does not require any special equipment which means the man




                                                 4
in the field can calculate the readability of existing material in the field situation using it. The

formula for the Flesch Count is quite complex and is best calculated either using a calculator or

by using conversion charts. The Flesch Reading Ease formula has associated with it a test-retest

reliability of .79 according to one study (Thomas, et al. in press). This same study indicates

test-retest reliabilities for the ARI and Fog Count to be much higher, .99 and .96 respectively.

Certainly the difficulty of calculating the Flesch Formula is a significant contributing factor.

Thus, there is a need to simplify the Flesch Formula for Navy use.




                                                   5
                                           METHOD


Subjects

       The sample consisted of 569 subjects from four schools at two Navy bases. Thirty-eight

subjects were eliminated from the sample because of failure to follow instructions, illness, or

because no GCT score was available leaving 531. Great Lakes Naval Training Center provided

the following subjects: 191 BE/E students, 78 of which were in a remedial class, and 78 GM

students from "A" and "C" schools. The Naval Air Station, Memphis, provided the following

subjects: 242 ADJ students, and 246 AVA students. The subjects were predominantly new

enlistees with less than six months in the Navy. Most were recent high school graduates. A

small number of marines and several women were included in the sample. Testing was

conducted in September and October 1974.

       Subjects were chosen to be representative of the Navy enlisted population. The most

important matching variable was GCT score. Pinning, (1974) reported the mean GCT of the

Navy enlisted population to be 54.3 as of 1973. Standard deviation of the test is supposed to be

10. The average GCT of the sample used in the present study was 54.7, with a standard

deviation of 8.03. Thus, the match was very close and the sample is representative of the

population of Navy enlisted personnel. The mean ARI score for the sample was 52.8 with a

standard deviation of 8.16.

Test Materials and Procedures

       Eighteen passages of material totaling 3,067 words were used. Mean passage length was

170 words. Passages were selected from Rate Training Manuals deemed by specialists engaged




                                                 6
in the writing of these manuals to be representative. Manuals were chosen to represent ratings

characterized by a full range of GCT scores. Also a number of manuals were chosen that deal

with basic military requirements. However, no manuals dealing with electronics were chosen

because for the most part, these manuals were classified.

      Twenty-three passages were originally chosen from the manuals and pretested on a class

of 30 students enrolled in an advanced undergraduate psychology class at Georgia Southern

College. Every fifth word of each passage was deleted and a line of standard length was inserted

for the subject to write his answer. On the basis of this pretesting, five passages were eliminated

as being either too easy or too difficult. A number of others were shortened so that they could be

completed faster.

      Table 1 contains a list of the 18 passages, the manual from which they were selected, and

their readability passages according to three standard formulas. Note that the average difficulty

of the passages is about the twelfth grade. Appendix A contains the 18 passages and indicates

which words were deleted for the cloze test.

      Two forms of the Gates-McGinitie Reading Test were used to assess reading ability:

Form E (intended for grade levels 7-9) and Form F (intended for grade levels 10-12). Subjects

with GCT scores of 55 and above were administered the more difficult test and those with GCT

scores below 55 were administered the easier test. Only the comprehension section of the test

was given because this section directly measured the pertinent variable: comprehension of

narrative material. The raw score on the test was converted to a grade level by interpolating

from tables in the "Technical Supplement" to the reading tests.




                                                 7
3.
2.
                                                  TABLE 1

     GRADE LEVEL OF DIFFICULTY OF 18 TEST PASSAGES CALCULATED WITH OLD FORMULAS

     Passage               Name of Manual                    NAVTRA            Fog
     Number                (Title of Passage)                  No.     ARI    Count   Flesch

       1       Hull Maintenance Tech 3 + 2                   10573     10.6   12.4      8-9
               (Temporary Repairs)

       2       Hull Maintenance Tech 3 + 2                   10573     20.3   15.9     16+
               (Preheating for Welding)

       3       Ship's Serviceman 1 + C                       10287-E   13.3   12.9    13-16
               (Distribution and Ownership)

       4       Ship's Servicemen's Handbook                  10292-A    8.8    7.8      8-9
               (Washing)

       5       Petty Officer 3 + 2                           10056-C    9.5    8.0      8-9
               (Personal Appearance of Petty Officers)

       6       Journalist 1 + C                              10295-A   12.4   12.8    13-16
               (Communiqués)

       7       Aerographer's Mate 1 + C                      10362-A   12.7   13.1    13-16
               (Wind Velocity and Fog)

       8       Aerographer's Mate 1 + C                      l0362-A   16.4   17.9    13-16
               (General Circulation of
               Air Currents)
       9       Fireman                                       10520-D    9.7   10.4        7
               (Operating the Globe Valve)

       10      Aerographer's Mate 3 + 2                      10363-D   13.1   14.4    13-16
               (Sea Wave Observations)

       11      Petty Officer 3 + 2                           10056-C    7.8    7.0      8-9
               (Obtaining Water)

       12      Seaman                                        10120-F   16.7   16.0    10-12
               (Rope Construction-Fiber Rope)

       13      Machinery Repairman 3 + 2                     10530-D   13.4   12.5    10-12
               (Truing and Dressing the Wheel)



                                                         8
                                          TABLE 1 (Continued)

GRADE LEVEL OF DIFFICULTY OF 18 TEST PASSAGES CALCULATED WITH OLD FORMULAS

Passage              Name of Manual                    NAVTRA            Fog
Number               (Title of Passage)                  No.     ARI    Count   Flesch

  14      Machinery Repairman 1 + C                    10531-C   12.0   13.7    13-16
          (Cleaning Metals for Spray Metalizing)

  15      Petty Officer 3 & 2                          10056-C    9.7   11.6      8-9
          (Role of the Navyman)

  16      Military Requirements for P01 & C            10057-C   13.5   14.0     16+
          (Operational Orders & Plans)

  17      Basic Military Requirements                  10054-D   10.4   10.4    10-12
          (When to Salute)

  18      Basic Military Requirements                  10054-D   10.9    7.2     11.7
          (Uniforms of the Day)

                                                        _
                                                        X =      12.3    12.1    11.7




                                                   9
      Each subject received nine of the eighteen passages, the particular nine passages being

assigned according to a Latin Square design.

      Testing of subjects was done in groups, either in the classroom or in larger rooms with

combined classes and took two hours. The reading test was administered first and this required

25 minutes. Each subject then proceeded to the cloze passages. In almost all cases, subjects had

an opportunity to finish all nine cloze passages. Cloze tests were scored according to a strict

criterion, that is, only minor misspellings were allowed. Otherwise the word was scored as being

wrong.




                                                10
                                            RESULTS


      Table 2 contains the scaled reading grade level for each of the eighteen test passages.

These grade levels were calculated in the same way employed by Caylor, et al., (1972), That is,

50 percent of subjects with a reading ability at a particular grade level had to score 35 percent or

better on the cloze test. Note the range of scaled reading grade levels to be. 5.5 to 16.3. This

wide range results from the wide range of reading ability scores according to the two forms of

the Gates-McGinitie Reading Test: from grade levels 6 to 16. It appears likely that the use of

only the comprehension sections of the tests resulted in higher estimates of reading ability than

would have resulted from the use of the entire test. However, comprehension rather than

vocabulary and speed versus accuracy (the other two sections of the test) reflects most what this

study addresses: that is, improving comprehension by Navy enlisted personnel of technical and

training material read on the job.

      A multiple regression statistical procedure was applied with scaled reading grade level for

each of the passages serving as the criterion measure and the various formula factors serving as

predictor variables. In the case of the three formulas to be recalculated, there was both a word

difficulty factor and a sentence difficulty factor. The sentence difficulty factor for each of the

ARI, Fog and Flesch Formulas is sentence length. The word difficulty factor for the Fog and

Flesch Formulas is a syllable count. For the ARI, average strokes per word is the word difficulty

measure.

      Multiple regression techniques could not be applied to recalculate the Fog Count because

the formula is not in the proper format. However, it can be noted that the original Fog Count

tends to overestimate grade level of difficulty. the mean grade level of difficulty of the eighteen


                                                 11
                                         TABLE 2

GRADE LEVEL OF DIFFICULTY OF 18 TEST PASSAGES CALCULATED WITH NEW
   FORMULAS, AND SCALED READING GRADE LEVEL OF TEST PASSAGES

Passage           Scaled                                          Fog              Flesch
Number             RGL                    ARI                    Count            Formula
   1                 6.9                8.5 (8.5)*                 10.9            9.7 (9.7)*
   2                16.1               18.3 (18.3)                 14.4           16.7 (16.9)
   3                16.0               12.4 (12.4)                 11.4           12.7 (12.8)

   4                10.9                7.9 (7.8)                   7.3            8.2 (8.3)
   5                 7.0                8,6 (8.4)                   7.5            7.1 (7.1)

   6                16.0               11.3 (11.3)                 11.2           12.3 (12.4)

   7                12.0               11.3 (11.4)                 11.6           11.7 (11. 8)

   8                16.3               14.7 (14.9)                 16.4           14.7 (14.9)

   9                 7.8                8.0 (7.9)                   8.9            8.0 (8.0)

   10                8.9               11.9 (1l.6)                 12.9           11.7 (11. 8)

   11                9.0                7.0 (6.7)                   6.5            8.1 (7.8)

   12               16.1               12.6 (12.8)                 13.5           11.8 (11.9)

   13                8.9               11.5 (11.6)                 11.0           10.0 (10.1)

   14               10.8               10.6 (10.6)                 12.2           12.5 (12.7)

   15                5.5                7.7 (7.6)                  10.1            8.4 (8.5)

   16               11.8               12.7 (12.8)                 12.5           13.8 (14.0)

   17                5.8               10.2 (10.1)                  9.9            9.3 (9.4)

   18                9.8               10.6 (l0.5)                  6.7            6.6 (6.7)

            __
            X       10.9               10.9 0.0.9)                 10.8           10.7 (10.8)


          *Note: Grade levels in parentheses are calculated with simplified formulas.

                                              12
passages is 12.1 as seen in Table 1. The mean scaled reading grade level of these passages is

10.9. The recalculated Fog Count takes this overestimation into account. The recalculated

Flesch and ARI formulas derived from multiple regression procedures, and the recalculated Fog

Count are shown in Table 3. The original Fog Count tended to overestimate the scaled grade

level of difficulty of the passages by about 1.5 grade levels. The new recalculated Fog Count

takes this into account by containing a correspondingly larger subtracted constant.

      Table 2 also shows the grade levels of each passage calculated with the new formulas.

Note that all of the new formulas predict a grade level for the test passages which is about one to

one and one-half grade levels below that of the original formulas. This can be seen by

comparing Tables 1 and 2.

      Table 4 contains the intercorrelations of the three original formulas derived from the

eighteen test passages. It also contains correlations of the three recalculated formulas derived

from the eighteen test passages. Note that these intercorrelations are generally higher in the case

of the recalculated formulas. The correlation between the recalculated Flesch and ARI formulas,

which were calculated according to multiple correlation techniques, is considerably higher than

the correlation obtained by using the old formulas (.87 versus -.74). This negative correlation

between the old formulas results because the original Flesch Reading Ease Formula uses a

Reading Ease score which is inversely proportional to grade level.

      Two other formulas were recalculated as a part of this study. These were the Farr-Jenkins-

Paterson (FJP) adaptation of the original Flesch Reading Ease Formula (Farr, Jenkins, &

Paterson, 1951) and the FORCAST Formula (Caylor et al., 1972).




                                                13
                                        TABLE 3


    EXISTING AND RECALCULATED READABILITY FORMULAS FOR THE
               ARI, FOG COUNT, AND FLESCH FORMULAS


Automated Readability Index

 Old: GL*        = 0.50 (words/sentence) + 4.71 (strokes/word) – 21.43

    New: GL         = 0.37 (words/sentence) + 5.84 (strokes/word) – 26.01

Simplified: GL = .4 (words/sentence) + 6 (strokes/word) – 27.4

Fog Count
   Old:             easy words + 3 (hard words), if Average Fog Count*** ≥ 20
            GL =          2 (sentences)

                 easy words + 3 (hard words) – 2, if Average Fog Count < 20
            GL = _________sentences_____________
                               2

    New:          easy words + 3 (hard words) – 3
             GL = _________ sentences_____________
                                2
Flesch Reading Ease Formula
   Old:     RE*** = 206.835 – 1.015 (words/sentence) – .836 (syllables/100 words)

   New: GL            = .39 (words/sentence) + 11.8 (syllables/word) – 15.59

   Simplified:      GL = .4 (words/sentence) + 12 (syllables/word) – 16


*GL is grade level.

**Average Fog Count equals (easy words + 3 hard words) / sentences; easy words are 1 and 2
  syllable words and hard words are words having more than 2 syllables.

***RE is Reading Ease; grade level is determined from a conversion table.




                                             14
                                        TABLE 4




INTERCORRELATIONS BETWEEN THE GRADE LEVELS PREDICTED BY RECALCULATED
        ARI, FOG COUNT, AND FLESCH FORMULAS FOR 18 TEST PASSAGES




Formula                                   Fog                                           Flesch


ARI                                     .80 (.83)*                                   .87 (-.74)

Fog                                                                                  .90 (-.71)




          * Correlation coefficients in parentheses are for the original formulas.




                                            15
The original and recalculated formulas are shown in Table 5. One interesting result was noted as

result of the multiple regression derivation of the FJP formula. A formula was derived for the

word factor alone (which is percent of one syllable words). This formula, which is shown in Tabl

5, is directly comparable to the FORCAST Formula. This previous study demonstrated that the

addition of a word difficulty factor added very little to the ability of the formula to predict

comprehension. This was not the case of the present study as the addition to the FJP formula of

the sentence difficulty factor (average sentence length) added considerably to the multiple R

(which was increased) from .646 to .749. Thus the coefficient of determination, which indicates

the degree of shared variance between the predicted grade level and comprehension of the test

passages, was increased from 41.6 percent to 57.6 percent. This 16 percent increase makes the us

of the sentence difficulty factor very useful. Coefficients of determination (which is the square of

the multiple R) were also calculated in the derivation of the ARI. For the formula containing only

the word difficulty factor (strokes/word) it was 30.9 percent but when the sentence difficulty

factor was added, it increased to 54.4 percent.




                                                  16
                                            TABLE 5




EXISTING AND RECALCULATED FORMULAS FOR THE FJP AND FORCAST FORMULAS




 Farr-Jenkins-Paterson        Adaptation of Flesch Formula.
      Old:   RE*       = 1.599 (% 1 syllable words)     – 1.015 (words/sentence) – 31.517

      New:   GL** = – .307 (% 1 syllable words ) + .387 (words/sentence) + 22.05

FORCAST

      Old:   GL        = 20.43 – .11 (1 syllable words in 150 word sample)

      New:   GL          = 32.53 – .24 (1 syllable words in 150 word sample)




*RE is Reading Ease; grade level is determined from a conversion table.
**GL is grade level.




                                                17
4.

                                  DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS


           The main results of this study are the recalculated ARI, Fog and Flesch Formulas which

     are shown in Table 3. The recalculated ARI formula has a slightly lower weighting for the word

     length factor (.37 versus .50). The word difficulty factor (strokes/word) is weighted slightly

     heavier in the recalculated formula (5.84 versus 4.71). The subtracted constant in the re-

     calculated formula results in an estimate of grade level of difficulty over a grade lower than the

     original formula. This is consistent with the prediction that Navy personnel familiar with the

     vocabulary of Navy training documents should understand this material better than other types of

     narrative material. Other factors, such as content and familiar patterns of wording probably also

     contributed to this increased understanding.

           The recalculated Fog Count is very similar to the original Fog Count. However, there is

     only one form of the new formula while there are two forms of the original formula, depending

     on whether the predicted grade level of difficulty is above or below the tenth grade level of

     difficulty. The new formula has only one form regardless of predicted grade level of difficulty.

     This makes it simpler to use. The use of a subtracted constant of three in the new formula (rather

     than 2 or 0 in the old formulas) results in a lowered estimate of readability. The new Fog Count

     was not calculated according to multiple regression procedures because it is not in the proper

     format. The new formula was changed simply to reflect a lowered grade level of reading

     difficulty of a little more than one grade level. However, it correlates very well with the

     recalculated ARI and Flesch Formulas (above .8 in both cases). This indicates that the

     recalculated Fog Count measures much the same thing as the recalculated ARI and Flesch

     Formulas.


                                                     18
      The recalculated Flesch Formula has a different format than the original Flesch Reading

Ease Formula. The original formula predicts "Reading Ease" which must be converted to grade

level by means of a conversion table. An examination of this conversion table (Flesch, 1948)

shows a linear relationship between Reading ease and grade level between grade levels 8 and 16.

A slightly different slope exists for grade levels for the seventh grade and below but this is of

limited concern because most Navy narrative reading material is above the seventh grade level of

reading difficulty. The new Flesch Formula shown is a linear equation that directly predicts

grade level. This eliminates a step which saves time and the possibility of error involved in an

additional step.

      Simplified ARI and Flesch Formulas which can be used in place of the recalculated

formulas are also shown in Table 3. They are much simpler to use, particularly if the calculation

of the equation is done by hand rather than with a calculating machine. Even if a calculating

machine is available, however, a simple formula is preferable to a complex one. Thomas,

Hartley and Kincaid (in press) reported results concerning re1i&bilities associated with the ARI,

Fog Count and Flesch Formulas. A good deal of reliability was lost in the calculation of the

original Flesch Reading Ease Score. This is a difficult equation as all of the constants are carried

out to three decimal places. The recalculated Flesch and ARI Formulas contain constants that

are carried out to only two decimal places which is an improvement because the additional

decimal place would result in virtually no increase in accuracy. The simplified ARI and Flesch

Formulas have either one or no decimal places in the constants which makes them still easier to

use. While this results in about .1 grade level of error (as compared with the use of the

recalculated formula) this can be an acceptable level of error in many circumstances. Actually,



                                                 19
5.

     readability formulas are only accurate to within one grade level, so an error of .1 grade level is

     trivial. The new Fog Count is even easier to use and can be calculated entirely by hand.

            Two recent readability formulas developed for military use, the RIDE (Carver, 1974a)

     and FORCAST (Caylor, et al., 1972) Formulas use only a word difficulty factor in the equations.

     Neither contains a sentence difficulty factor. This has certain advantages particularly when such

     formulas are used in the rewriting of existing material. It is fairly simple to simply cut sentences

     in two if a formula contains sentence length as a factor. The word length factor is much more

     difficult to mechanically manipulate as Caylor, et al., (1972) points out. Adding a sentence

     difficulty factor to the FORCAST Formula added almost nothing to the prediction of

     comprehension. This finding is in marked contrast to the results of the present study as is

     mentioned earlier in this report. The addition of the sentence difficulty factor in the present

     study added substantially to the ability of the equation to predict comprehension. Table 5 shows

     the FORCAST formula and the equation derived from the data of the present study which is

     equivalent. An equation was derived based solely on the word difficulty factor of strokes/word

     of the ARI, but the full ARI equation containing a sentence difficulty factor gives a better

     prediction of comprehension, also. This formula is as follows:

                                     GL = 6.2 (strokes/word) – 20.68

     The formula is provided for information only; its use is not recommended.

            To be best understood, reading material should be written at a level of difficulty

     appropriate to the reading ability of those reading it. The formulas derived in this study, if

     properly applied, should make Navy material easier to understand.




                                                      20
                                         REFERENCES


Carver, R. P. Measuring the reading difficulty levels of Navy training manuals.
        Washington, D. C.: American Institutes for Research, 1974. (a)
Carver, R. P. Measuring the reading ability levels of Navy personnel. Washington, D. C.,
         American Institutes for Research, 1974. (b)
Caylor, J. S., Sticht, T. G., Fox, L. C., & Ford, J. P. Methodologies for determining reading
         requirements of military occupational specialties. Human Resources Research
         Organization Technical Report, 1972.
Duffy, T. M., & Nugent, W. Reading ability and attrition of June enlistees.
        Unpublished manuscript.
Farr, J. N., Jenkins, J. J., & Paterson, D. G. Simplification of Flesch Reading Ease Formula.
          Journal of Applied Psychology, 1951, 35, 333-357.
Flesch, R. F. A new readability yardstick. Journal of Applied Psychology, 1948, 32, 221-
         223.
Johnson, K. A., Relova, R. P. & Stafford, J. P. An analysis of the relationship between Air Force
        Procedural Manuals and discrepancies involving noncompliance with the procedures,
        M. A. Thesis, Air Force Institute of Technology, 1972 (AD 750 917).

Kincaid, J. P., & Delionbach, L. J. Validation of the Automated Readability Index: A
         follow-up. Human Factors, 1973, 15, 17-20.
Kincaid, J. P., & McDaniel, W. C. An inexpensive automated way of calculating Flesch
         Reading Ease scores. Patent Disclosure Number 031 350, United States Patent
         Office, April 29, 1974.
Kincaid, J. P., Yasutake, J. Y. & Geiselhart, R. Use of the Automated Readability Index to
         assess comprehensibility of Air Force technical orders. SEC-TR-67-47. Wright-
         Patterson AFB, Ohio: Aeronautical Systems Division, 1967.

Klare, G. R. The measurement of readability. Ames, Iowa: Iowa State University Press, 1963.


McDaniel, W. C. Inter-analyst reliability and time measures for the Automated and Manual
       Flesch Counts. M. A. Thesis, Georgia Southern College, 1974.
Pinning, J. Proposed training specifications for new weapon systems procurement and
         relationship to technical manuals. In C. R. Vest (Ed.), Naval education and training: a
         symposium (January 10-11, 1974; Pensacola, FL). Pensacola, FL: National Security
         Industrial Association and Chief of Naval Education and Training, 1974.


                                                21
Rankin, E. F., & Culhane, J. O. Comparable cloze and multiple-choice comprehension test
        scores. Journal of Reading, 1969, 13, 193-198.

Smith, E. A. & Kincaid, J. P. Derivation and validation of the Automated Readability Index
        for use with technical materials. Human Factors, 1970, 457-464.

Thomas, G., Hartley, R. D., & Kincaid, J. P. Test-retest and inter-analyst reliability of the
       Automated Readability Index, Flesch Reading Ease Score, and the Fog Count.
       Journal of Reading Behavior. (In Press)




                                                 22
        Appendix A



Eighteen Test Passages Taken

From Rate Training Manuals




            23
                                       Passage 1 (RGL =6.9)
                                      TEMPORARY REPAIRS
        Temporary repairs are usually made by securing some type of patch over the damaged section
of pipe. The material used for the patch depends upon the type of piping that is being repaired. A
good general rule to go by is to make the temporary patch from the same type of material that is used
for the flange gaskets in the system. Back up the patch with a piece of sheet metal, and secure the
sheet metal to the pipe with bolted metal clamps or similar devices. A sealing compound may be
applied between the patch and the pipe to help seal the patched area. For low pressure salt water
piping, a satisfactory patch can be made from red lead putty wrapped with canvas and served with
marlin or friction tape.
        Small holes in some piping may be temporarily repaired by drilling and threading and
inserting a screw.
                                       Passage 2 (RGL =16.1)
                                  PREHEATING FOR WELDING
       Preheating involves raising the temperature of the base metal or a section of the base metal
above the ambient temperature before welding. Preheat temperatures may vary from as low as room
temperature (70° F) when welding outdoors in winter to as high as 600° and 1200° F when welding
highly hardenable steels and ductile cast iron respectively.
       Preheating is a very effective means of reducing weld metal and base metal cracking.
Preheating may improve weldability generally but has two major beneficial effects when it retards
the cooling rates in the weld metal and heat-affected base metal, and reduces the magnitude of
shrinkage stresses. However, when welding quenched or age-hardened materials, the effects of
preheating can be detrimental unless controlled within allowable limits.
                                       Passage 3 (RGL =16.0)
                               DISTRIBUTION AND OWNERSHIP
         The defense supply centers control the wholesale distribution of stock among the four
services. Wholesale stock is material owned by the integrated manager. Retail stock is material
owned by the military services. Use is made of the facilities, regardless of military department
ownership, that are best suited to meet the requirements of the services and the area served. These
facilities are operated with administrative support furnished by the service that owns the facility.
When a center is the principal user of the facility, however, and has management jurisdiction, the
center provides the administrative support to the other tenants.
      All stocks, both operating and reserves, under the control of a defense supply center are
owned by the center and financed by a separate fund, the Defense Stock Fund.


                                               24
                                     Passage 4 (RGL =10.9)
                                           WASHING
       To conserve fresh water supplies it may be necessary on occasions that you use sea water
for washing. When this is necessary, use Type II Detergent. Two formulas are presented which
have been tested for effective salt water washing.
       Even though you must use sea water for washing, use fresh water for the last two rinses.
        Generally, you will not wash woolen clothing in the ship's laundry. Men should be
instructed not to put their blues into the laundry because of the danger of their accidentally
getting in with cottons and being ruined. You may find it necessary, however, to wash blankets
or other woolens. If so, proceed as prescribed by the recommended formula.
       Water at tap temperature will not damage wool fibers. Hold mechanical agitation to a
minimum to prevent shrinkage. This is why you should stop the machine when filling and
draining water, and run it at low speed and for short periods.
                                      Passage 5 (RGL =7.0)
                      PERSONAL APPEARANCE OF PETTY OFFICERS
       The uniform worn is the uniform of the day with SP brassard, web belt, nightstick, and
whistle. Do not swing, twirl, or play with the nightstick. Keep it attached to your belt, ready for
quick release. Sidearms are worn only under special circumstances.
        Members of the shore patrol are expected to maintain the highest standards of personal
appearance and military bearing. You must always be in a correct, clean, and neat uniform; have
your hair neatly trimmed; be freshly shaven; and have shoe shined and hat squared. Servicemen
are quick to notice and criticize faults in the uniform and behavior of the shore patrol.
                                     Passage 6 (RGL =16.0)
                                        COMMUNIQUES
       The communiqué is a special form of an official news release giving a straight forward
account of daily combat operations.
       As a command’s official battle report to the public, its preparation requires maximum
care and attention to ensure quality and accuracy. Adequate time must be allotted to draft and
coordinate the release.
        The communiqué covers the broad tactical and operational picture with little emphasis on
isolated engagements. If an action deserves special attention, it calls for a separate release.
While a release of this type does not attempt to go into detail, it should contain enough data to
give newsman a well rounded account of the whole battle area. Correspondents see only a

                                                25
small section of the day's fighting and depend heavily on the communiqué and news briefing to
round out their stories.
                                     Passage 7 (RGL =12.0)
                        WIND VELOCITY IS A IN FOG FORMATION
        Wind velocity is an important consideration in the formation of fog and/or low ceiling
clouds. The horizontal motion of the air next to the earth’s surface produces friction, which, in
turn, causes the air near the ground to tumble, setting up eddy currents. The size of the eddy
currents vary with the wind speed and the roughness of the terrain. Lower wind currents produce
more shallow eddies, and stronger wind currents produce eddies up to several hundred feet and
higher.
        When the temperature and dewpoint are close at the surface and eddy currents are 100
feet or more in vertical thickness, adiabatic cooling in the upper side of the eddy could give the
additional cooling needed to bring about saturation. Any additional tooling would place the air
in a temporary supersaturated state. The extra moisture will then condense out of the air,
producing a low ceiling cloud. Adiabatic heating on the downward side of the eddy will usually
dissolve the cloud particles. If all cloud particles dissolve before reaching the ground, the
horizontal visibility should be good. However, if many particles reach the ground before
evaporation, the horizontal visibility will be restricted by a moderate fog condition.
                                     Passage 8 (RGL =16.3)
                       GENERAL CIRCULATION 'OF AIR CURRENTS
        Hemispheric differences in general decrease with increasing altitude. All the jet streams
of the Northern Hemisphere have their southern analogues. Southern jets are more intense on the
average with smaller amplitudes, reflecting the greater zonal indices (over double in magnitude)
of this hemisphere. The stratospheric cyclone of the polar night transforms into the anticyclone
of the polar day in both hemispheres, but the explosive warming prior to the onset of the polar
day has not yet been observed over the Antarctic.
        Blocks are comparatively rare and occur southeast of continents in late winter and early
spring, and drift slowly eastward again emphasizing the importance of middle latitude continents
on features of the general circulation.
        There is some doubt as to whether counterparts of the Aleutian and Icelandic lows exist
in the mean circulation of the Southern Hemisphere. If they do, they are located in the Ross and
Weddell Sea areas, on the edge of Antarctica, and are most sharply defined at about 700
millibars. Navy meteorologists with experience in those areas indicate that many lows
undergoing cyclolysis move into these regions but disappear rapidly at low levels, retaining their
identity as cold lows aloft for longer periods.

                                                26
                                       Passage 9 (RGL =7.8)
                               OPERATING THE GLOBE VALVE
        The valve should never be jammed in the open position. After a valve has been fully
opened, the hand wheel should be turned toward the closed position one-half turn. Unless this is
done, the hand wheel is likely to freeze in the open position, and it will be difficult to close the
valve. Many valves have been damaged in this manner. Another reason for not leaving globe
valves fully open is that it is sometimes difficult to tell if a valve is open or closed. If a valve is
jammed in the open position, the stem may be damaged or broken by someone who thinks that
the valve is closed, and tries to force it open. Valves that are exceptions to the above rule are
called back seating valves. Sometimes the operation of a back seating valve will require that it
be fully opened. Whenever this is so, special instructions to that effect will be given. These are
designed so that when fully open, the pressure being controlled cannot reach the valve stem
packing, therefore eliminating possible leakage past the packing.
                                           Passage 10 (RGL =8.9)
                                      SEA WAVE OBSERVATIONS
       Accurate sea condition observations are necessary if the forecaster is to be expected to
provide accurate sea condition forecasts for operational use.
         When a breeze comes up, the sea surface will instantaneously become covered with tiny
ripples which form more or less regular arcs of long radius. They increase rapidly in height until
they attain a maximum steepness where the pointed crests take on a smooth glassy appearance,
indicating small breaking processes. As the wind continues to blow over the sea, it drags over
the surface producing increasingly larger waves. The wind acts in a manner similar to a paddle
rhythmically stroking the water. There is, however, one difference. The wind is constantly
making small changes in direction and speed. The result is that the wind is acting like many
different paddles stroking the sea in different directions and at different speeds. This produces
many different wave trains in the sea, all with different directions, all with different periods, and
all at the same given point in the ocean.
       If all the different wave trains generated are considered to be sine waves with different
heights, directions, and periods., the sum of the heights of the sine waves at a given instant is the
mechanism that produces the irregular appearance of The sea. The various waves which
comprise the sea surface are commonly referred to as either sea waves or swell waves.




                                                  27
                                      Passage 11 (RGL =9.0)
                                      OBTAINING WATER
       Before describing chemical means of obtaining water, let’s first discuss some natural
sources of fresh water, of which rain is the most common.
        Never discard any article that will hold water. When it rains, every container that can
possibly hold water will be invaluable. To assist you in filling the containers, a rain-catcher tube
is attached to the lifeboat canopy. Even in a light rain, some water will drain from the canopy
down through the tube. After filling all available containers, stow them carefully so as not to
lose any water. Cover all open containers to retard evaporation, and use those containers first.
During the rain drink all you can hold.
        In polar areas, fresh water can be obtained from old sea ice. This ice is bluish, splinters
easily, and is nearly free from salt. New ice is milky in color, hard, and salty. Fresh water may
also be obtained from icebergs, but use caution. As the berg’s underwater portion melts, it gets
top heavy and can capsize without warning.
                                     Passage 12 (RGL =16.1)
                            ROPE CONSTRUCTION - FIBER ROPE
        Any rope that is not wire is fiber rope. Except in a few instances where it is put to certain
special uses, fiber rope is never called anything but line aboard ship. For example, there are fiber
manropes on gangways; foot ropes on hammocks (and formerly on the yards of sailing ships);
bolt ropes on sails and other canvas; ridge ropes on awnings but they are usually of wire); dip
ropes for passing some object under, outside of, or around another; and bull ropes for heavy
heaving without benefit of a purchase (tackle).
        Some small craft have fiber wheel ropes running from wheel to rudder, although these,
again, are more likely to be of wire. There are other exceptions as well, but all the exceptions
merely go to prove the strict general rule that aboard ship a line is never called a rope.
        In the manufacture of line, the fibers of various plants are twisted together in one
direction to form yarns; the yarns are twisted together in the opposite direction to form strands;
then the strands are twisted together in the opposite direction to form the line. In the days when
ships swung to fiber anchor cables, three or four lines were twisted together, again in the
opposite direction, to form the cable.




                                                28
                                     Passage 13 (RGL =8.9)
                           TRUING AND DRESSING THE WHEEL
       Grinding wheels, like other cutting tools, require frequent reconditioning of cutting
surfaces to perform efficiently. Dressing is the term used to describe the process of cleaning the
periphery of grinding wheels. This cleaning breaks away dull abrasive grains and smoothes the
surface so that there are no grooves. Truing is the term used to describe the removal of material
from the cutting face of the wheel so that the resultant surface runs absolutely true to some other
surface such as the grinding wheel shaft.
       If grinding wheels get out of balance because of out of roundness, dressing the wheel will
usually remedy the condition. A grinding wheel can get out balance by being left with part of
the wheel immersed in the coolant; if this happens, the wheel should be removed and dried out
by baking. If the wheel gets out of balance axially, it probably will not affect the efficiency of
the wheel on bench and pedestal grinders. This unbalance may be remedied simply by removing
the wheel and cleaning the shaft spindle and spindle hole in the wheel and the flanges.
                                     Passage 14 (RGL =10.8)
                      CLEANING METALS FOR SPRAY METALIZING
        In order to ensure a solid bond between the sprayed coating and the base material to
which it is applied, the areas to be metalized and the adjacent areas must be free from such
contaminants as oil, grease, water, paint, and other foreign matter. To thoroughly clean these
surfaces, a suitable chemical solvent (or heat) and wire brushing (or sandblasting) must be used.
If the surface to be metalized is of a porous material, it must be heated sufficiently to drive out
any oil or other contaminant. Generally a temperature of 400 to 500° F is satisfactory. (For
some surfaces, a chemical cleaning may be necessary before heating.) Carbon formed by the
heating operation may be removed from the surface by sandblasting. The final cleaning is
accomplished by applying the chemical cleaning solvent with a clean brush.
                                     Passage 15 (RGL = (7.6)
                                   ROLE OF THE NAVYMAN
       You may well be wondering where you fit in the picture. True, you may be only one
small cog in the huge wheel of the Navy, but everyone is important. If enough cogs break down,
the wheel won't turn. If enough men fail to perform their duties properly, the ship may be
endangered. Our Navy is great because the personnel in it make it so.
        As a sailor, you represent the Navy to the people at home; in foreign countries you also
represent the United States government. People form their opinion of the Navy on your
appearance and action, so wear your uniform with pride and conduct yourself in a manner that
will reflect credit on you and on the Navy.

                                                29
       When overseas, you must be especially careful of your conduct. If foreigners visited your
home town and treated the people as though they were inferior, got drunk in public, damaged
property, or just made a general nuisance of themselves, you would naturally be resentful and
have a poor opinion of them. The people of other countries are no different. Remember, when
you are overseas you are the foreigner. Many of their customs will be unfamiliar and may seem
strange to you, but they are their customs and you must abide by them, and by local laws.
                                      Passage 16 (RGL =11.8)
                              OPERATION ORDERS AND PLANS
        An operation order is intended for a specific, relatively short operation. An operation plan
is designed for operations extending over a large geographic area and usually covering a
considerable period of time. A plan also is used to cover contingency, for example, an attack on a
particular area. It is prepared well in advance and specifies when it will become effective (on
signal, time). For our purpose we discuss the operation order.
      An operation order is composed of the heading, body, and ending, plus such annexes and
appendices as the originator deems necessary.
        The heading shows the title of the issuing headquarters, name of the flagship or
headquarters ashore, geographical location (or latitude and longitude) of the originator, security
classification of the order, copy number, and date-time group. In the absence of any other
instruction, the date-time group is the effective time.
      The body of an operation order consists of a description of the task organization, five
numbered paragraphs, and instructions for acknowledging.
                                      Passage 17 (RGL =9.9)
                                       WHEN TO SALUTE
        Juniors always salute first, and hold the salute until it is returned or acknowledged by the
officer saluted. Persons not covered do not salute, except to avoid embarrassment or
misunderstanding.
       Aboard ship you need not salute officers after the first daily meeting, except that the
following officers must be saluted on every meeting: the commanding officer, officers senior to
him, visiting officers, officers making inspections, and any officer you are being addressed by or
addressing.
        There are several things you should keep in mind about saluting. If possible, always use
your right hand. If your right hand is injured or occupied, then you may use your left hand, unless
you are in civilian clothes.



                                                 30
      Accompany your salute with a cheerful respectful greeting; for example: ”Good
morning, sir,” “Good afternoon, Commander,” “Good evening, Chaplain.”
       Always salute from the position of attention. If walking, you need not stop, but hold
yourself erect and square. If on the double, slow to a walk when saluting.
       Look directly into the officer’s eyes as you salute.
        If you are carrying something in both hands, and cannot render the hand salute, take the
position of attention, look at the officer as though you were saluting and greet him.
       Remove a pipe, cigar or cigarette from your mouth before saluting.
       Salute an officer even if he is uncovered or his hands are occupied. He will acknowledge
your salute by saying: “Good morning,” Good afternoon,” or something similar.
                                     Passage 18 (RGL =6.7)
                                   UNIFORMS OF THE DAY
      Basically four uniforms may be prescribed: service dress, full dress, tropical, and
working. A white hat, black shoes and socks, and, as appropriate black or white web belts are
worn.
        The service dress blue uniform (“dress blues”) consists of dress blue jumper, blue
trousers, the neckerchief, and ribbons. Service dress whites are white trousers, white undress
jumper, neckerchief and ribbons.
       Full dress is the same as service dress except that medals, rather than ribbons are worn.
        There are three tropical uniforms: white long, white, and khaki. Tropical white long (the
one usually prescribed) consists of white trousers, and white short sleeve shirt. Ribbons usually
are prescribed. Tropical white substitutes white shorts and knee length white socks for the white
trousers and black socks. Tropical khaki consists of khaki shorts with black shoes and socks and
an undershirt. (An undershirt is worn with all uniforms.)




                                                31
             Appendix B



Instructions for Calculating Readability

   Using the Recalculated ARI, Fog

     Count, and Flesch Formulas




                  32
                Instruction for Recalculated Automated Readability Index (ARI)

        The Automated Readability Index (ARI) is a method for determining the difficulty of
written material. The ARI utilized three measures that are recorded on a counter as you type.
The three measures are the number of strokes, the number of words, and the number of
sentences. Only minor changes from standard typewriting are necessary. The following
instructions will aid you in arriving at the ARI.
I.     Typing Instructions

       1. When you have completed typing you must end with three measures:
           A.   THE NUMBER OF STROKES
           B.   THE NUMBER OF WORDS
           C.   THE NUMBER OF SENTENCES
       2. Getting the number of strokes is a simple task since every time you use a key a
          stroke is registered on the counter. Letters, symbols, and punctuation marks are
          included in the count of strokes. The spelling of a word is immaterial as long as it
          contains the proper number of letters.
           REMEMBER: YOUR TASK IS TO OBTAIN COUNTS AND ONLY THE
                     COUNTING IS IMPORTANT.

       3. Counting the words is done by counting the number of times the space bar is used. A
          few simple changes in typing are required for this.
           A.   DO NOT DOUBLE SPACE AFTER A SENTENCE.
           B.   DO NOT INDENT NEW PARAGRAPHS.
           C.   ALWAYS SPACE AFTER THE LAST WORD ON A LINE.
           REMEMBER: THE RESULTS MUST BE ACCURATE. DON'T BE AFRAID TO
                     START OVER IF SOMETHING GOES WRONG. IF YOU
                     START OVER, RESET THE COUNTER OR YOUR FINAL
                     MEASURES WILL NOT BE ACCURATE.

       4. Counting the sentences is done by pressing the right hand key on the top row (=).
          DON'T USE THIS KEY FOR ANY OTHER PURPOSE. When you have reached
          the end of a sentence, punctuate it according to the material being typed; then type =.

II.    Computation Instructions
       1. On the Tabulation Sheet record the number of strokes, the number of words, and the
          number of sentences as shown on the counter. Subtract the number of sentences from
          the number of strokes to get proper stroke count.
            .                                  33
2. Obtain the Average Sentence Length.
                                                                      (words)
   Divide the number of words by the number of (sentences):
                                                                     (sentences)


3. Do computations to 2 decimal places. Obtain the Average Word Length.
                                                                      (strokes)
   Divide the number of strokes by the number of words:
                                                                      (words)



4. Compute the Grade Level (GL) according to the following equation:
   GL = 0.37 (Average Sentence Length) + 5.84 (Average Word Length) – 26.01

5. If you want you may use instead a slightly less accurate but simpler equation:
   GL = 0.4 (Average Sentence Length) + 6 (Average Word Length) – 27.4




                                       34
                                         Instructions for Recalculated Fog Count

             The Fog Count is a means of determining the difficulty of written material. Two
     measures must be recorded: (1) the number of easy words; and (2) the number of hard words
     (polysyllables). An easy word can be pronounced in one or two sounds, for example, "like"
     "riding." Hard words have more than two sounds. "Difficulty" and "hospital" are two examples
     of hard words. The following instructions will aid you in arriving at a Fog Count.
     I.     HOW TO MAKE A FOG COUNT
            1.   Count the number of sentences.

                 Treat any complete statement or thought as a sentence. In some contexts one word
                 can be a sentence, as here:
                      "Where's Tom?"
                      "Flying."

                 Don't rely on a period to tell you where a sentence ends. When taking a Fog Count,
                 you may consider a semicolon as a period because it indicates the end of a complete
                 thought; thus, the sentence that you are reading now may be counted as two
                 sentences.
            2.   Count the number of easy words (1 and 2 syllables) and give them a value of 1.

            3.   Count the number of hard words (more than 2 syllables) and give them a value of 3.

6.               IMPORTANT: Mark the value (1 or 3) you assign a word above it.
                 REMEMBER: Every word must have a value.
                 Study the following example:
                  1    1     3       1       1       1 1       1        1     1       1                   3   1       1       1
                 To be usable for this purpose, a war plan must define quantitatively the major wartime
                       1 1       1       1       1         3            1 1       3           1   1   1 1             3   1
                 tasks, in terms of forces deployed, rates of operation, and the rates of attrition and
                             3       1       1 1     1         1        1 1 1             1       1   1           1       3
                 replacement, so that we may derive from it the required levels of support activities,
                      1 1            1           1                 3              3       1                   3
                 such as training, supply, maintenance, procurement, and transportation.

            4.   Add the l's and the 3's. This is the Total Fog Count.
                 So in the example above:
                      number of l’s = 41
                      number of 3's = 10 (10 X 3 = 30)
                      Total Fog Count = 41 + 30 = 71

                                                                   35
      5.   Find the Average Fog Count.
           Divide the Total Fog Count (#4) by the number of sentences.

      6.   Convert to a Grade Level (GL).
           A. Subtract 3 from the Average Fog Count.
           B. Divide this by 2 to obtain the Grade Level.

      7.   The equation for calculating the Grade Level is as follows:
                  Easy Words + 3 (Hard Words)
                                              − 3
             GL =          Sentences
                                  2
II.   PROBLEMS IN MAKING A FOG COUNT
      1.   Names of persons. A proper name is only given the value of 1. Common titles
           (such as Mr., Miss, General) are considered part of the proper name and are not
           given a value. That is, the common title and the proper name are combined and
           receive a value of 1. Uncommon titles are considered apart from the proper name
           and receive a value of 3.
           Note the following examples:
                        1
             Dave B. Lucas
                            1
             Miss Ruth Smith
                                1
             General Eisenhower
                    3               1
             Commissar Harry M. Raines
      2.   Numbers. The Fog Count treats all numbers, regardless of size, as easy words.
           Therefore, all numbers receive a value of 1. Dollars, cent, and percent symbols are
           considered part of the number with which they are written. Study the following
           examples:
               1
             38%
               1                                                                       ...
             547
                1
             $9.50
                    1
             eighty-eight
                                              36
3.   Abbreviations. Many abbreviations have gained wide use and acceptance among
     people. Such common abbreviations usually stand for an, easy word and receive a
     value of 1. Some examples: YMCA, USAF.




                                      37
                          Instructions for Recalculated Flesch Formula

        The Flesch Reading Ease formula is a method of determining the difficulty of written
material. The Flesh Reading Ease formula uses two measures: (1) average number of words in a
sentence; and (2) the number of syllables per word. Te following instructions will aid you in
arriving at a Flesch Reading Ease Score.

1.   Count the number of words.
     Count as a word any numbers, letters, symbols, groups of letters surrounded by white
     spaces. Hyphenated words and contractions count as one word. For example, each of the
     following count as one word:
       couldn't
       F.O.B.
       i.e.
       32,008
       second-grade

2.   Count the number of sentences.
     Count as sentences each unit of thought that can be considered grammatically independent
     of anther sentence or clause. A period, question mark, exclamation point, semi-colon, and
     colon usually denote independent clauses. Sentence fragments and incomplete sentences are
     counted as a sentence.
     Study the following examples:
       "Where did he go?" "Home." (count as 2 sentences)
       The equipment is old because: a. It was issued several years ago.
       b. It needs constant repair.    c. We have no spare parts for it. (count as 3 sentences)
     But the following Sentence counts as 1 because the words after the colon are not
     complete sentences.
       Three ships met at the appointed hour: Cario, Scott Fitzgerald, and the William James.

3.   Count the number of syllables.
     Count syllables the way you pronounce the word: for example.
       "row"                          1 syllable
       "maintain"                     2 syllables
       "dictionary"                   4 syllables



                                               38
     With symbols and figures the syllables are known by the way they are normally
     pronounced, for example,
       ¢ (cent)                        1 syllable
       R.F.D.                          3 syllables
       1918 (nineteen eighteen)        4 syllables
     if there is any doubt about syllables, consult a dictionary.

4.   Find the Average Sentence Length.
                                                                      (words)
     Divide the number of words by the number of sentences:         (sentences)

5.   Find the Average Number of Syllables per word.
                                                                    (syllables)
     Divide the number of syllables by the number of words.          (words)

6.   Compute the formula.
     Combine the Average Sentence Length and the Average Number of Syllables per Word into
     the following equation:
     The equation for calculating the Grade Level is as follows:
       GL = .39 (Average Sentence Length) + 11.8 (Syllables/Word) – 15.59

7.   If you want, you may use a slightly less accurate but simpler equation.
       GL = 0.4 (Average Sentence Length) + 12 (Syllables/Word) – 16




                                                 39
