REVIEW ARTICLE
Retrieval Practice Consistently Benefits
Student Learning: a Systematic Review of Applied
Research in Schools and Classrooms
Pooja K. Agarwal 1 & Ludmila D. Nunes 2 & Janell R. Blunt 3
Accepted: 11 January 2021/
# The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Science+Business Media, LLC part of Springer Nature 2021
Abstract
Given the growing interest in retrieval practice among educators, it is valuable to know
when retrieval practice does and does not improve student learning —particularly for
educators who have limited classroom time and resources. In this literature review, we
developed a narrow operational definition for“classroom research” compared to previous
reviews of the literature. We screened nearly 2000 abstracts and systematically coded 50
experiments to establish a clearer picture of benefits from retrieval practice in real world
educational settings. Our review yielded 49 effect sizes and a total n = 5374, the majority
of which (57%) revealed medium or large benefits from retrieval practice. We found that
retrieval practice improved learning for a variety of education levels, content areas,
experimental designs, final test delays, retrieval and final test formats, and timing of
retrieval practice and feedback; however, only 6% of experiments were conducted in non-
WEIRD countries. Based on our review of the literature, we make eight recommendations
for future research and provide educators with a better understanding of the robust
benefits of retrieval practice across a range of school and classroom settings.
Keywords Retrieval practice. Learning . Classroom. Schools . Applied research. Testing effect
As researchers have demonstrated for more than a century, retrieval practice—the act of recalling
previously learned information—improves long-term learning and memory. For example, simply
retrieving a trivia fact (e.g., what was the name of the ship of Charles Darwin’s famous voyage?)
helps students remember this fact better than if they simply re-read it multiple times.1
In a landmark study on retrieval practice by Roediger and Karpicke ( 2006b), college
students read brief passages (e.g., about sea otters, the solar system, etc.) and either engaged
in re-reading the passages or retrieval practice (i.e., free recall by writing down everything they
Educational Psychology Review
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10648-021-09595-9
1The name of the ship of Charles Darwin ’s famous voyage is the Beagle.
* Pooja K. Agarwal
pagarwal@berklee.edu
Extended author information available on the last page of the article

could remember from the passage). After a five-minute delay, students performed better on a
free recall test after initially re-reading, but after a one-week delay, their performance was
greater when they engaged in initial retrieval practice by freely recalling the passage.
Early research on the use of retrieval practice as a strategy to improve long-term learning
found consistent benefits from retrieval practice (e.g., Gates 1917; Glover 1989;M y e r s1914;
Spitzer 1939). Revived by Roediger and Karpicke ( 2006b), this area of research has been
progressing rapidly. In particular, scientists have been extending research from laboratory
settings to educational settings, with demonstrated benefits for student learning ranging from
primary school to medical school, and content areas ranging from math and science to history
and foreign languages (Dunlosky et al.2013). Researchers are increasingly urging educators to
apply retrieval practice in the classroom (Agarwal and Bain 2019; Brown et al. 2014; Butler
and Carpenter 2015; Dunlosky and Rawson 2019; Fazio and Marsh 2019;K a r p i c k ee ta l .
2016; Nunes and Karpicke 2015; Roediger and Butler 2011; Weinstein et al. 2018). In tandem,
educators are increasingly implementing retrieval practice using a variety of methods including
multiple-choice online apps, frequent recall prompts, and quizzes during lectures.
Given the growing interest in retrieval practice among educators, it is valuable to know
when retrieval practice does and does not improve student learning—particularly for educators
who have limited classroom time and resources. From a scientific standpoint, it is also valuable
to have a clear understanding of the literature to date in order to inform future research.
To address these pursuits for both educators and researchers, we developed a narrow
operational definition for “classroom research” compared to previous reviews of the literature.
Using our definition and detailed search syntax, we screened nearly 2000 studies and coded 50
experiments drawn from research on retrieval practice, conducted in classroom settings.
Aims of the Present Study
Aim 1: Compare Apples to Apples Using Narrower Review Criteria
The first aim of the present review was to compare classroom studies that examined the effects
of retrieval practice, while applying a narrower set of inclusion criteria than used in prior
reviews or meta-analyses. In order to inform future research (aim 2) and clarify recommen-
dations for educators (aim 3), we included only classroom studies in which retrieval practice
was administered individually and in person; in other words, we did not include studies
conducted in laboratory settings, studies with collaborative retrieval, nor studies in which
retrieval practice was administered online.
To date, reviews and meta-analyses of research on retrieval practice have typically included
a mix of studies drawn from both laboratory and applied settings (Adesope et al. 2017;
Bangert-Drowns et al. 1991;B r a m ea n dB i e l2015;D u n l o s k ye ta l .2013; Eisenkraemer
et al. 2013; Green et al. 2018; Karpicke and Grimaldi 2012; McLaughlin and Coderre 2015;
Nguyen and McDaniel 2015; Pyc et al. 2014;R o w l a n d2014). For example, Adesope et al.
(2017) conducted a meta-analysis of 217 research studies on retrieval practice, of which 11%
were from classroom settings (p. 666). While informative for research purposes, what works in
the laboratory does not necessarily work in the classroom —and vice versa. As Adesope et al.
observed in their own meta-analysis,“In light of potential confounds, comparison of classroom
and laboratory effect sizes should be interpreted with caution ” (p. 687).
Educational Psychology Review

Even when meta-analyses and reviews were restricted to research in applied settings, the
format and implementation of retrieval practice for included studies varied widely. For
example, in the 23 studies included in the literature review by Moreira et al. ( 2019), materials
ranged from encyclopedia passages (Jaeger et al. 2015)t oT Vr e c o r d i n g s( C r a n n e ye ta l .
2009). One study included in the Moreira et al. review was conducted in the classroom, but
students worked individually at computer stations (Lipko-Speed et al. 2014). Another study
was carried out after the course had concluded (Carpenter et al. 2009).
Of the studies included in meta-analyses by Schwieren et al. (2017); 19 studies) and Sotola
and Crede ( 2020; 52 studies), students engaged in unsupervised online retrieval practice
(Burdo and O ’Dwyer 2015;D a n i e la n dB r o i d a2004; Kibble 2007), collaborative retrieval
practice (Bojnova and Oigara2011;V o j d a n o s k ae ta l .2010), and retrieval practice in computer
labs after the classroom lecture (Wiklund-Hörnqvist et al. 2014).
While prior reviews and meta-analyses have increased our overall understanding of the benefits
of retrieval practice across a variety of educationally relevant materials and conditions, recommen-
dations drawn from such widely varying circumstances may lack the specificity required for actual
classroom practice. As an alternative, we present acomprehensive database search capturing more
published articles than previous reviews. We also used narrow screening criteria to ensure that the
classroom studies manipulated retrieval practice under comparable real world conditions.
As an additional cause for concern regarding the existing literature, recent works have
pointed out several shortcomings of meta-analytical methods, including the use of random
effects models, when data to be analyzed are complex (e.g., Carter et al. 2019; McShane and
Böckenholdt 2020;T i p t o ne ta l .2019). Applied research is inherently complex and messy,
with challenges and confounds that are difficult to control. For example, some of the studies in
the present review included multiple retrieval practice conditions compared against the same
control condition, one retrieval practice condition compared against multiple control condi-
tions, or data that were collapsed across conditions —all of which render the effect sizes
computed non-independent. In addition, research has shown that the reproducibility of mean
effect sizes derived from meta-analyses is low (Lakens et al. 2016).
Furthermore, reporting of data has been inconsistent in prior reviews. For example,
Adesope et al. ( 2017) and Rowland ( 2014) reported mean weighted effect sizes, but they
did not report effect sizes or confidence intervals for individual studies. Similarly, Brame and
Biel ( 2015), Green et al. ( 2018), and Moreira et al. ( 2019) did not report effect sizes for
individual studies. Bangert-Drowns et al. ( 1991) reported effect sizes for individual studies,
but they did not report sample sizes nor confidence intervals around the effect sizes.
Thus, reviews and meta-analyses in this area of applied research should be considered with
caution. In consideration of these challenges —a mix of settings, varied formats of retrieval
practice, wide-ranging implementation methods, and statistical concerns—we felt that conditions
across the 50 experiments included in the presen t review were too varied for a meta-analytic
approach. Even under our narrowed inclusion criteria, seldom was there a consistent retrieval
practice format or implementation method, a g roup of subjects without at trition, a perfectly
controlled experimental condition or dependentmeasure, or a singular effect of interest.
For these reasons, in lieu of a meta-analysis that collapses effect sizes over a wide variety of
applied experiments, we report effect sizes for each individual comparison in forest plots
(Figs. 3, 4, 5,a n d 6) and also in the Appendix. Because we include sample sizes, effect sizes,
and confidence intervals for each individual study and comparison (when data were available
to calculate them), the present review provides a more accurate understanding of the conditions
under which retrieval practice benefits learning compared to prior reviews.
Educational Psychology Review

Our operational definition of retrieval practice was as follows: an active attempt by a
student to recall or recognize, and then reconstruct, their memory of knowledge during initial
learning. While this is sometimes referred to as the “testing effect,” we chose to use the phrase
“retrieval practice” in our review of classroom research for a few reasons.
First, the term “retrieval practice ” has become more commonly used in the research
literature to encompass various forms of retrieval during initial learning, including both recall
and recognition (e.g., Karpicke 2012).
Second, retrieval practice in the classroom takes many forms that differ from the typical
notion of a test. For example, across the 50 experiments included in our review, students
engaged in a variety of retrieval practice activities, including free recall, short answer quizzes,
multiple-choice quizzes, and quizzes with standardized patients. These low-stakes or no-stakes
classroom learning activities were seldom referred to as“tests” by the authors of the studies. In
addition, consider the increasing use of educational apps for retrieval practice, such as Kahoot
and Quizlet, which bear very little resemblance to traditional tests.
Third, the terms “testing,”“ testing effect,” and “test-enhanced learning” create confusion
with unrelated educational activities such as summative assessments and standardized testing
(Agarwal and Bain 2019). As such, our operational definition and terminology highlight that it
is the process of practicing retrieval (the active attempt) that shapes learning, not tests.
After screening nearly 2000 abstracts, 50 experiments drawn from 37 studies met our full
screening criteria, in which we required classroom-relevant materials, retrieval practice by
students individually, and implementation during class periods under the supervision of the
instructor or researcher. Critically, we compared classroom studies only (apples to apples),
rather than drawing comparisons across both classroom and laboratory settings (apples to
oranges). We feel that our narrowed criteria provide greater specificity in terms of directions
for future research (aim 2) and recommendations for classroom implementation (aim 3).
Aim 2: Inform Future Directions for Research on Retrieval Practice
A second aim of the present review was to inform future directions for research on retrieval
practice. In order to construct the most thorough review of the literature possible, we
developed precise search syntax for five databases: PsycINFO, PsycARTICLES, ERIC,
Web of Science, and PubMed (see Table 1). While our screening criteria were narrower
compared to previous reviews, our systematic search yielded more classroom-specific peer-
reviewed publications (37 studies in the present review of the literature) when compared to the
number of studies included in previous reviews (e.g., 30 studies in Adesope et al. 2017;2 3
studies in Moreira et al. 2019; 19 studies in Schwieren et al. 2017).
It is possible that the greater number of studies in our review, compared to previous reviews,
may be due to a more recent search of the literature. Still, using our methodology, we found a
few classroom studies that were not included in previous literature reviews, albeit having been
published before those reviews (e.g., Graham1999; Kromann et al. 2009; Narloch et al. 2006).
In this way, we feel that our systematic review contributes a comprehensive record of research
to date, which better informs future directions for applied research on retrieval practice.
Specifically, we investigated unresolved questions in the research literature on retrieval
practice. For example, is there an optimal freque ncy of retrieval practi ce to improve student
learning in classroom settings? Do all content a reas and educational levels (e.g., K-12, under-
graduate, and medical school) benefit from retrieval practice? Which is more beneficial for student
learning, multiple-choice or short answer ret rieval practice? To foreshadow our results, we
Educational Psychology Review

examined these possible moderating variables bycategorizing the 50 included experiments across
various characteristics (e.g., education level, experimental design, sample size). We present effect
sizes for each individual experiment in forest plots (Figs.3, 4, 5,a n d6)a n da l s oi nt h eAppendix.
Typically, we think of laboratory research as informing applications of cognitive psychol-
ogy in real-world settings. The opposite is also true: Research conducted in real-world settings
can inform basic research in laboratory settings. For example, are benefits from retrieval
practice modulated by incentives? Researchers have examined this question in laboratory
experiments with foreign language vocabulary, but have found inconsistent results (e.g., Abel
and Bäuml 2020; Kang and Pashler 2014). Meanwhile, in the real world, students ’ perfor-
mance on retrieval practice and final tests typically count toward course grades; in most of the
studies included in the present review (66%), this was the case. In contrast to previous reviews
of retrieval practice research in classrooms (e.g., Sotola and Crede 2020), we intentionally
included grades as a moderating variable in our coding system. With a better understanding of
motivational factors in the classroom in the present review, researchers can more effectively
examine these factors in the laboratory.
Aim 3: Clarify Recommendations for Classroom Implementation of Retrieval Practice
In order to provide recommendations for classroom implementation of retrieval practice, we
systematically coded conditions of interest to educators (see the Appendix and http://osf.io/
mz2ks for the complete coding). For example, educators express a number of concerns
regarding implementation, particularly the use of multiple-choice questions and the optimal
timing for feedback (Agarwal and Bain 2019). In both of these examples, laboratory and
applied research suggest mixed approaches (Adesope et al. 2017). Additional conditions of
interest in the present review included:
& Education level (e.g., K-12, college/university, medical school)
& Content area (e.g., psychology, medicine, and history)
& Comparison conditions (e.g., reviewing material, lessons without quizzes, infrequent high
stakes exams)
& Retrieval practice timing (e.g., every class, once a week, once a month)
& Length of delay between the last retrieval opportunity and the final test (e.g., days or weeks)
& Format for initial retrieval practice and final test (e.g., multiple-choice, short answer, free recall)
& Feedback timing (e.g., immediate, delayed, no feedback)
Our narrower review criteria also allowed us to examine the benefits of retrieval practice under
conditions found in real-world classrooms—but uncommon in laboratory studies —including
research with diverse student populations and situations in which performance on retrieval
practice counted toward students’ course grades.
Considerations for Applied Research in Classrooms
Definition of “Classroom” Research
The primary aim of the present review was to examine the literature on retrieval practice
research conducted in classrooms. But how does one define a “classroom?” Classrooms,
Educational Psychology Review

particularly in the present day, take a variety of forms (e.g., small seminars, large lecture halls,
and online) and include a variety of activities (e.g., lectures, group projects, and discussion).
For example, 14% of all students in higher education (more than 5.8 million students) take the
entirety of their courses online (Allen et al. 2016).
In addition, retrieval practice is inherent to classroom instruction: teachers pose questions
during class, students retrieve knowledge during group discussion, and students retrieve during
course exams. If we were to consider any classroom settings in which retrieval practice takes
place, such a review would be far too broad to draw conclusions for future research and
practical implementation. Thus, defining what constitutes a classroom for the purpose of this
review required careful consideration.
Consider a study conducted by Herbert Spitzer in 1939. More than 3500 children across the
state of Iowa were asked to read passages about peanuts and bamboo, which were followed by
zero, one, two, or three multiple-choice tests administered in the classroom. After two months,
final test performance was greater for students who engaged in retrieval practice compared to
students who did not receive initial retrieval practice.
While this study by Spitzer ( 1939) was conducted with school-age children in classrooms,
Spitzer himself observed, “The learning was of little practical use to the children ” (p. 655).
This study is a valuable demonstration of the benefits of retrieval practice in an applied setting,
but it is also an instance in which educational research deviated from typical classroom
instruction; namely, the materials were irrelevant to what students were learning in class
(see also Myers 1914).
As a second example, consider a study by Sennhenn-Kirchner et al. (2016). Dental students
completed a four-hour course on suturing skills, which was followed by retrieval practice
using a suture simulation pad, either collaboratively in pairs or individually. On a final test
approximately one month later, students in the collaborative retrieval group outperformed
students who had engaged in retrieval practice individually.
In Sennhenn-Kirchner et al. (2016), the information to be learned and the format of retrieval
practice was typical of dental education. However, in the collaborative retrieval condition, it is
possible that one student led suture practice while the other student watched and did not
engage in retrieval practice. The extent to which all students engaged in retrieval practice was
not measured and could not be guaranteed by the researchers or instructors.
In order to ascertain trends and draw conclusions from the growing literature on retrieval
practice, we limited our definition of “classroom” research using the following guidelines:
& Relevant course materials: Information to be learned for research purposes was the same
as, or directly related to, assigned course materials
& Individual, not collaborative: All students engaged in retrieval practice individually under
the supervision of researchers and instructors
& Closed-book, not open-book: All retrieval practice took place without the use of notes,
external learning aids, or the internet
Comparison Conditions for Experiments in Classroom Settings
When it comes to control conditions in research on learning, it is critical to compare what
students do and also for how long. In laboratory experiments, retrieval practice is typically
compared to re-studying, particularly to ensure that time spent with materials is equated across
Educational Psychology Review

conditions (e.g., Roediger and Karpicke 2006b). In classroom experiments, the comparison to
retrieval practice is typically “business as usual, ” where a teacher lectures on the same
material, but without quizzes (Khanna and Cortese 2016).
For all studies reviewed in the present study, students spent approximately the same amount
of time with materials between the retrieval practice intervention and comparison conditions.
For example, in Freda and Lipp ( 2016), classes consisted of lectures with quizzes vs. lectures
without quizzes. In Kromann et al. ( 2010), students received quizzes on simulated cardiac
arrest scenarios or they received lecture presentations of the scenarios. In Roediger et al.
(2011)), using a within-student design, questions over half the material were presented on
quizzes and the final exam, whereas questions on the remaining material appeared only on the
final exam (non-quizzed items).
In the present review, we chose to include two studies in which the comparison of interest
was dosage, where researchers directly manipulated quantity, or the number of opportunities
for retrieval practice (Dunlosky et al. 2013). We included experiments by Foss and Pirozzolo
(2017), in which retrieval practice in the form of 4–8 exams was compared to learning after 2–
3 exams. We also included an experiment by Leeming ( 2002), in which quizzes administered
during every class were compared to four exams over the course of the semester. All remaining
studies included in the present review (35 studies) did not directly manipulate dosage and
many did not report dosage of retrieval practice at all.
Intertwined with dosage of retrieval practice are timing and spacing, which presents a few
challenges—especially in classroom research. First, different dosages of retrieval practice
imply different retrieval practice timings (e.g., every class vs. every week represents a higher
dosage but also a different implementation schedule). In this way, dosage can be easily
confounded with spacing (e.g., quizzes every class means more retrieval practice, but less
spacing than once per week). Second, higher dosage should result in more learning, but we
also know that increased spacing can result in more learning (McDaniel et al. 2011). Third,
many of the studies included in our review confounded dosage, timing, and spacing, or they
did not report whether repeated retrieval opportunities included the same items (a requirement
for spaced practice). Thus, because we could not code for dosage or spacing, we coded for
retrieval practice timing across the studies (e.g., whether students generally engaged in
retrieval practice daily, weekly, monthly).
We chose to exclude studies in which the primary comparison of interest was
between two (or more) types of retrieval practice. For example, we excluded exper-
iments by Carpenter et al. ( 2016; they compared retrieval practice via drawing
diagrams vs. labeling diagrams); Niedermeyer and Sullivan ( 1972; they compared
three vs. four multiple-choice test alternatives); Rohrer et al. ( 2020); they compared
blocked vs. interleaved retrieval practice); Weinstein et al. ( 2016, experiment 3); they
compared quiz questions interspersed during lectures or at the end of lectures). This
growing area of applied research on optimal types of retrieval practice awaits a future
review of the literature.
Note that in the present review, we do not refer to “control conditions” or “control groups.”
Instead, we refer to “comparison conditions” and “comparison groups.” What may be consid-
ered an appropriate control group in one classroom setting may not be appropriate in another;
thus, we did not restrict whether a control had to take a specific form of re-studying, re-
presentation, repetition, concept mapping, or alternative “non-retrieval” conditions (see also
Kornell et al. 2012).
Educational Psychology Review

Internal and External Validity in Applied Research
Applied research, particularly on student learning and memory, brings with it a
number of uncontrolled variables and circumstances. These variables for both students
and teachers —such as absences, external motivators, and commitments outside the
classroom—can affect internal validity and fidelity of implementation, or the extent to
which an intervention is implemented in accordance with the procedure (O ’Donnell
2008).
A common characterization of laboratory and classroom research is that laboratory
research is regarded as high on internal validity (free from errors in the experiment)
and low on external validity (findings do not generalize to the real world), while
classroom research is low on internal validity and high on external validity. Even so,
as Anderson et al. ( 1999) argue, individual studies may be high or low on internal
and external validity; validity cannot be defined simply based on whether a study was
conducted in a lab or a classroom.
In addition, in any situation in which retrieval practice was implemented without supervi-
sion, it is impossible to know whether it conformed to our operational definition. Thus, in
order to maintain fidelity of implementation and internal validity as much as possible, our
inclusion criteria required that all instructional activities, retrieval practice, and assessments
took place in person under the supervision of the researcher or the instructor, in person, and not
online.
By screening nearly 2000 abstracts and systematically reviewing 50 experiments conducted
in classrooms, we aimed to establish a clearer picture of benefits from retrieval practice in real-
world educational settings. We developed specific search syntax and operationalized class-
room research, investigated unresolved questions in the research literature, and developed
research-based recommendations for the implementation of retrieval practice for educators.
Methods
Literature Search
We conducted a literature search in January 2018 for empirical research on retrieval practice
conducted in school and classroom settings. We developed search syntax for five databases
(PsycINFO, PsycARTICLES, ERIC, Web of Science, and PubMed), using different combi-
nations of keywords including retrieval practice, testing effect, course, and teach (see Table 1
for a complete description of the search syntax used for each database). We also performed a
backwards search using the reference lists of the abstracts that passed both initial and detail
screenings, but the backwards search did not reveal any new abstracts. Our literature search
yielded a total of 1810 abstracts. We used Zotero ( 2020, http://www.zotero.org), an open-
source research tool for reference management, to organize and download abstracts.
Initial Screening Criteria
Initial screening of 1810 abstracts was conducted to ensure that research met the following
criteria for inclusion in the present review:
Educational Psychology Review

Research must be published in, or in press at, a peer-reviewed journal at the time of our
search. Abstracts from conference proceedings, dissertations, or non-peer reviewed journals
were excluded. Literature reviews were also excluded.
Research must be empirical, with at least two conditions (i.e., a retrieval practice interven-
tion and a comparison) and at least one final test phase (i.e., a retention measure after retrieval
practice). Abstracts indicating that findings were based on observational, survey, correlational,
or other qualitative methods were excluded.
Research must be conducted with typical student populations. Abstracts indicating that
research was conducted with patient populations were excluded. For example, participants in
Coyne et al. ( 2015) were traumatic brain injury patients and participants in Viveiros et al.
(2017) were patients with heart failure.
Research must include a measurement of retention of information as the dependent variable.
Abstracts indicating that the dependent variable was test anxiety or students’ preferred study strategies
were excluded (e.g., Agarwal et al.2014; Hartwig and Dunlosky2012; Karpicke et al.2009).
As shown in Fig. 1, a total of 1623 abstracts were excluded from the review following initial
screening. Seven abstracts that were not available for full-text download were also excluded during
initial screening.
Detailed Screening
Detailed screening of the remaining 180 abstracts was conducted using the following criteria:
Procedurally, all instructional activities, retrieval practice, and assessments must take place in
person during class periods under the supervision of the instructor or researcher. For example,
research conducted in laboratories (Lipko-Speed et al.2014) or online (Becker-Blease and Bostwick
2016) was excluded. Retrieval practice carried out after the course ended was also excluded (e.g.,
Carpenter et al.2009). Furthermore, retrieval practice must be completed by individual students (i.e.,
research conducted in collaborative groups was excluded; e.g., Vojdanoska et al.2010) and controlled
by the instructor (i.e., research where retrieval practice was self-regulated using flashcards was
excluded; e.g., Rawson et al.2013).
In terms of materials, information to be learned must be the same as, or directly related to,
assigned course materials that students would be learning in the absence of researchers. For
example, Duchastel (1979) had students memorize passages about solar power that were not
part of course materials; thus, it was excluded from the present review. In addition, the retrieval
Table 1 Search syntax used and number of abstracts screened
Database Search syntax Number of
abstracts
PsycINFO, PsycARTICLES,
and ERIC
(retriev* pract* OR testing effect OR “test* effect” OR
test-enhanc*) AND (class* OR course* OR teach* OR clinical)
1447
Web of Science (( “retrieval practice” OR “testing effect” OR test-enhanc*) AND
(class* OR course* OR teach*))
230
PubMed (((((retrieval practice[Text Word]) OR testing effect[Text Word])
OR test effect[Text Word]) OR test-enhanced[Text Word]))
AND ((((class[Text Word]) OR course[Text Word]) OR
teach[Text Word]) OR clinical[Text Word])
133
Total number of abstracts
screened
1810
Educational Psychology Review

practice intervention must take place without the use of notes, external learning aids, or the
internet (e.g., quizzes in class must be closed-book, not open-book). In addition, the amount of
instructional time during which students were exposed to materials must be equivalent across
retrieval practice and comparison conditions.
Coding Procedure
Following initial and detailed screenings, 50 experiments drawn from 37 studies were included in the
present review. As shown in the Appendix, we coded the following variables for each of the 50
experiments that passed all screening criteria: (a) the type of retrieval practice intervention; (b) the
comparison conditions; (c) calculated effect sizes and confidence intervals; (d) education level (i.e.,
K-12, undergraduate, or medical school); (e) content area (e.g., science, psychology, history); (f)
specific course topic (e.g., biology); (g) the experimental design; (h) sample size after attrition; (i)
whether the experiment was conducted in the United States (USA); (j) retrieval practice timing; (k)
the delay between the last retrieval practice opportunity and the final test; (l) the format of retrieval
Fig. 1 Flowchart of the screening process
Educational Psychology Review

practice (e.g., multiple-choice or short answer); (m) the provision of feedback after retrieval practice
(e.g., immediate or delayed); (n) the format of the final test; and (o) whether final test performance
counted toward students’ grades. When any variables to be coded were ambiguous, two or more of
the present authors coded the experiment independently and resolved discrepancies.
Effect Size Calculations
When coding or calculating effect sizes, we used performance on the final test that
occurred in closest proximity to the last ins tance of retrieval practice to avoid practice
effects. For example, in Roediger et al. ( 2011), middle school students completed
retention tests at the end of each chapter and also at the end of the semester; thus,
effect sizes from Roediger et al. are reporte d based on chapter test performance only.
Across the 50 experiments coded, we derived 49 effect sizes (Cohen ’s d). For 24
comparisons, data were insufficiently reported to calculate an effect size. Whenever
possible, we calculated the effect sizes and corresponding confidence intervals around
t h ee f f e c ts i z e s .W ed i ds oe v e nw h e nt h eo riginal study reported effect sizes because
(a) only one study reported confidence intervals around effect sizes (McDermott et al.
2014) and (b) this ensured consistency in the way the effect sizes were calculated.
Note that our calculated effect sizes did not match all of the effect sizes reported in
the original articles, although that appears to be common as researchers use different
formulas to calculate effect sizes (Pan and Rickard 2018). This is true especially for
within-subject designs, for which the correl ation between data must be accounted for.
For between-subjects designs, effect sizes and respective 95% confidence intervals were
calculated from a reported or derivable t statistic and a reported or derivable sample size, or
from reported or derivable sample sizes, means, and standard deviations. For within-subject
designs, effect sizes were calculated from a reported or derivable t statistic and a reported or
derivable sample size. To compute the effect sizes and 95% confidence intervals around them,
we used the MBESS package for R (functions ci.sm and ci.smd for within- and between-
subject designs, respectively; Kelley 2007a, 2007b, 2017).
We focus our discussion of effect sizes on our calculated Cohen ’s dsa n dw e
categorized obtained effect sizes as large, medium, and small using Cohen ’s( 1988)
standards. Large effect sizes were defined as d >0 . 8 0 ; m e d i u m e f f e c t s w e r e 0 . 5 0<d <
0.80; small effects were 0.20 < d < 0.50; very small effects were 0.00 < d < 0.20; and
negative effects were d < 0.00. The forest plots depicted in Figs. 3, 4, 5,a n d 6 allow
for a visual representation of the effect si zes and their precision (i.e., narrower
confidence intervals indicate more precise effects than wider confidence intervals).
Results
Coding for all experiments is available in the Appendix, as well as on the Open Science
Framework ( 2020, http://osf.io/mz2ks/). Across the 50 experiments coded in the present
review, the total sample size was n = 5374 (sample size not reported for Graham 1999).
Altogether, experiments coded ranged across a number of factors:
& Education levels ranged from elementary school to medical school (e.g., Goossens et al.
2016 a n dL a r s e ne ta l .2013a, respectively)
Educational Psychology Review

& Sample populations included three non-WEIRD countries: Pakistan (e.g., Ayyub and
Mahboob 2017), Taiwan (e.g., Tu et al. 2017), and Turkey (e.g., Atabek Yigit et al. 2014)
& Sample sizes after attrition ranged from fewer than 20 students to nearly 400 students
(Jones et al. 2016 and Bjork et al. 2014,r e s p e c t i v e l y )
& Delays between retrieval practice and the final test ranged from one day to the end of the
semester (e.g., McDaniel et al. 2013 and Tu et al. 2017, respectively)
As displayed in Fig. 2, the majority of effect sizes (57%) indicated medium or large benefits
from retrieval practice. In other words, 28 out of 49 Cohen ’s ds were greater than 0.50.
Overall, 16 effect sizes indicated large benefits from retrieval practice ( d > 0.80), 12 indicated
medium benefits (0.50 < d < 0.80), and 18 were small or very small ( d < 0.50). Only three out
of 49 effect sizes revealed a negative effect, or a benefit for the comparison condition (lessons
without quizzes) compared to retrieval practice (Khanna2015;M i c h a e l s2017;T ue ta l .2017).
In Fig. 3, all 49 effect sizes are depicted in a forest plot, which includes the 95% confidence
intervals around each effect size. The effect sizes are organized from the largest to the smallest,
and the width of the confidence intervals represents the precision of the effect size estimate.
The confidence intervals vary widely, possibly because of variability in sample size across
studies. However, only six confidence intervals around positive effect sizes extend below a
Cohen’s d of 0.00. This suggests that for almost all studies reviewed, possible values for effect
sizes are in a positive direction, indicating a consistent benefit from retrieval practice on
student learning.
Moderating Variables: Education Level, Content Area, Comparison Conditions,
Experimental Design, Sample Size, and Location
As shown in Table 2 and the Appendix, experiments were evenly distributed across education
levels. Of the 50 experiments reviewed, 20 experiments were conducted in K-12 settings
Fig. 2 Distribution of 49 effect
sizes (Cohen’s d) from the articles
reviewed. Note. Large effect sizes
were defined as d >0 . 8 0 ; m e d i u m
effects were 0.50 < d < 0.80; small
effects were 0.20 < d < 0.50; very
small effects were 0.00 < d <0 . 2 0 ;
and negative effects were d < 0.00
(Cohen 1988). See the Appendix
for a complete list of effect sizes
for each experiment
Educational Psychology Review

(elementary, middle, and high school); 20 experiments were conducted in undergraduate
settings (college/university level); and 10 experiments were conducted in medical schools.
As shown in Fig. 4, effect sizes were largest for studies conducted in middle school
classrooms. Effect sizes ranged from small to large for medical school, and studies conducted
at the undergraduate level resulted in smaller effect sizes. Note that all of the studies at the
middle school level were conducted within the same school district near St. Louis, Missouri
(MO), USA (Agarwal 2019;M c D a n i e le ta l .2011;M c D a n i e le ta l .2013; McDermott et al.
2014; Roediger et al. 2011). Of the eight studies at the medical school level, three were
conducted at a medical school in Copenhagen, Denmark (Kromann et al. 2009, 2010, 2011)
and three were conducted at a medical school in St. Louis, MO (Larsen et al. 2009, 2013a,
2013b). The nine studies at the undergraduate level were mostly conducted at different
colleges and universities.
Regarding content area, most experiments were conducted in science (k = 19) and psychol-
ogy courses (k = 16), with few experiments conducted in history ( k = 5), skills-based learning
(k = 5), spelling and vocabulary ( k = 4), and statistics ( k = 2; one experiment included both
science and history). These results indicate that more applied research is needed in non-science
areas, particularly in skills-based learning, mathematics, the humanities, and foreign language
learning.
In contrast to retrieval practice, the most common comparison conditions were when
students re-read material (e.g., studied a review sheet; k = 19), when the instructor provided
Fig. 3 Forest plot of 49 effect sizes (Cohen ’s d) from the articles reviewed
Educational Psychology Review

lessons without retrieval practice ( k = 14), and when lessons included retrieval practice, but
comparison performance was measured on non-quizzed items on a final test (k = 12). Only five
experiments included a comparison condition of fewer opportunities for retrieval practice (e.g.,
comparing two exams vs. weekly quizzes); experiments using this type of comparison yielded
small and very small effect sizes. Considering recent recommendations for educators to
provide frequent retrieval practice in their already established lessons and course structure
(Agarwal and Bain 2019), more research needs to examine the extent to which the quantity of
retrieval practice modulates benefits on learning compared to infrequent exams.
In sum, the majority of experiments revealed medium to large effect sizes, indicating that
retrieval practice consistently improves learning in schools and classrooms for a variety of
education levels and content areas, under diverse comparison conditions.
As shown in Table 2 and the Appendix, a majority of experiments were conducted within-
student ( k = 29). Twelve experiments were conducted between-students without random
assignment, and nine experiments were conducted between-students with random assignment.
Considering the logistical challenges and ethical concerns of random assignment in applied
Table 2 Distribution of experiments (k) by moderating variables
Total number of experiments
Education level (k=5 0 )
Elementary school 5
Middle school 12
High school 3
Undergraduate 20
Medical school 10
Content area (k=5 1 )
Science 19
Psychology 16
History 5
Skills-based (CPR, dental diagnosis, nursing skills) 5
Spelling and vocabulary 4
Mathematics (statistics) 2
Type of comparison condition (k=5 0 )
Re-read material 19
Lessons without quizzes 14
Non-quizzed items on the final test 12
Fewer opportunities for retrieval practice 5
Experimental design (k=5 0 )
Within-student 29
Between-students without random assignment 12
Between-students with random assignment 9
Sample size (k =49 )
Fewer than 100 students 32
Greater than 100 students 17
Location (k = 50)
WEIRD countries (USA, Denmark, Netherlands, Sweden) 47
Non-WEIRD countries (Pakistan, Taiwan, Turkey) 3
The total number of experiments reported under content area isk = 51 because Karpicke et al. (2014, experiment
3) included content from both science and history. The total number of experiments reported under sample size is
k = 49 because it was not reported by Graham ( 1999). When an experiment included more than one comparison
condition, the number of experiments listed refers to the type of condition in which time spent with material was
similar or equivalent to time spent engaged in retrieval practice
Educational Psychology Review

school settings, we were surprised to find that nearly half of the between-subjects experiments
included random assignment.
Within-student experiments revealed a range of effect sizes, with more medium to large
effect sizes than small effect sizes. Between-student experiments with random assignment
tended to have larger effect sizes, while experiments without random assignment had smaller
effect sizes. These results indicate that, similar to laboratory studies, retrieval practice improves
learning in applied settings whether experiments are conducted within-student or between-
students, with or without random assignment.
Regarding sample size, the majority of experiments (64%) were conducted with fewer than
100 students (see Table 2 and the Appendix). Average sample size varied by education level:
K-12 (M = 57.7), undergraduate (M = 149.3), and medical school (M = 134.8). Average sample
size also varied by experimental design: within-student ( M = 78.2), between-students ( M =
153.3), and between-students with random assignment ( M = 149.6). As shown in Fig. 4,
experiments conducted at the undergraduate level tended to have the smallest effect sizes,
but these studies also had the largest sample sizes. It is possible that retrieval practice may
simply be more beneficial for middle school and medical school students, compared to
undergraduate students, which we consider further in the General Discussion.
The vast majority of experiments reviewed (94%) were conducted in the USA and Western
Europe, consistent with prior findings that the majority of published studies in psychology are
Fig. 4 Forest plot of effect sizes (Cohen ’s d) by education level
Educational Psychology Review

conducted in WEIRD countries (western, educated, industrialized, rich, democratic countries;
Rad et al. 2018). Only three out of 50 experiments (6%) drew samples from schools outside the
USA and Western Europe, representing 6% of the total sample size in our review ( n =2 6 6o u t
of n = 5374). The three experiments conducted in non-WEIRD countries were from Pakistan,
Taiwan, and Turkey. Of these three, one experiment was conducted at the undergraduate level
and two were conducted at medical schools. In other words, all experiments at the elementary,
middle, and high school levels included in our review were conducted in WEIRD countries.
To foreshadow our General Discussion, applied research on retrieval practice is needed with
diverse student populations from non-WEIRD countries in order to provide accurate recom-
mendations for educators globally.
Additional research with larger and more diverse sample sizes would further our under-
standing of the benefits of retrieval practice in educational settings. In addition, measures of
individual differences could be included to examine whether there are optimal conditions for
retrieval practice depending on, for example, working memory, prior knowledge, intelligence,
and mind wandering (Agarwal et al. 2017; Francis et al. 2020; Minear et al. 2018;P a c h a ie ta l .
2016).
Retrieval Practice Timing and Delay Before the Final Test
As shown in Table 3, retrieval practice was typically provided at least once per week ( k =1 9 )
or every 2 –3w e e k s(k = 15). In a few experiments ( k = 6), retrieval practice was provided
multiple times throughout the semester, but specific timing was not reported. In the remaining
experiments, retrieval practice was provided within a single session ( k = 10). Because effect
sizes were evenly distributed across a range of timings (see Appendix), we recommend
educators provide students with opportunities for retrieval practice regardless of the precise
timing.
The most common delay between the last opportunity for retrieval practice and the final test
was a 1 –3-day delay ( k =2 0 ; s e e T a b l e3). The next most frequent delay was when a final
exam occurred at the end of the semester or conclusion of the course, after approximately 6 –
15 weeks, although a specific delay was not reported ( k = 14). Effect sizes were larger
following a 1 –3-day delay, while smaller followi ng an end-of-semester delay (see
Appendix). In other words, shorter delays led to a larger benefit from retrieval practice in
classroom settings. However, in laboratory research, the opposite effect has been shown —
longer delays lead to a larger benefit (Carpenter and Agarwal 2020; Roediger and Karpicke
2006a). For both theoretical and practical considerations, we encourage future research where
a range of delays between retrieval practice and final tests are directly manipulated.
Retrieval Practice Format and Final Test Format
As shown in Table 4, the most common formats for retrieval practice were multiple-choice
(k = 27) and short answer ( k = 17). Similarly, the majority of final test formats were multiple-
choice (k = 31) and short answer (k = 15). As displayed in Fig. 5, effect sizes were larger when
retrieval practice and final test formats matched (multiple-choice or short answer). When an
experiment included multiple formats (e.g., multiple-choice retrieval practice followed by a
short answer final test; k = 11), effect sizes were smaller. The transfer appropriate processing
framework may account for these findings, where a match between initial and final processing
typically promotes learning (Morris et al.1977). As such, we recommend both multiple-choice
Educational Psychology Review

and short answer formats for retrieval practice, and a match with final test format may be
optimal for promoting student learning.
When students engage in retrieval practice, a common concern is that they are simply
learning the test questions and answers (i.e., a practice effect). Thus, we investigated whether
questions during retrieval practice were typically rephrased or verbatim on the final test. For
nearly half of the experiments reviewed, questions were rephrased ( k = 22), which was most
common at the undergraduate and medical school levels. Effect sizes were generally smaller
for experiments with rephrased questions compared to experiments with verbatim or repeated
questions. Because transfer of knowledge following retrieval practice remains a challenge in
the classroom and in the literature (Agarwal 2019; Butler 2010; Pan and Rickard 2018), we
encourage more research on retrieval practice and transfer specifically in applied settings.
Transfer is, after all, a “holy grail” of education (Pan and Agarwal 2020).
Table 3 Distribution of experiments (k) by retrieval practice timing and final test delay
Total number of experiments
Retrieval practice timing (k =50 )
Single session 10
At least once per week 19
At least once every 2 –3 weeks 15
Multiple times throughout the semester (duration not specified) 6
Delay between retrieval practice and final test ( k=5 0 )
Immediate 4
1–3-day delay 20
1–2-week delay 7
Multiple exams throughout the semester (timing not specified) 5
One exam at the end of the semester or course (6 –15-week delay) 14
Table 4 Distribution of experiments (k) by retrieval practice format and final test format
Total number of experiments
Retrieval practice format (k=6 2 )
Multiple-choice 27
Short answer 17
Free recall 6
Cued recall, fill-in-the-blank, or matching 6
Simulated diagnoses 5
Retrieval format not reported 1
Final test format (k=6 4 )
Multiple-choice 31
Short answer 15
Free recall or essay 9
Cued recall, fill-in-the-blank, or matching 4
Simulated diagnoses 5
Final test questions (k =50 )
Rephrased 22
Verbatim 28
Final test scores counted toward students’ grades (k=5 0 )
Yes 33
No 15
Not reported or unavailable 2
The total number of experiments reported for retrieval practice format and final test format is greater than k =5 0
because some experiments included multiple formats
Educational Psychology Review

The majority of experiments included final test performance as part of students’ grades (k =
33; Table 4). Effect sizes ranged from small to large regardless of whether test scores were
included as part of students’ grades, indicating that retrieval practice improved student learning
under typical motivational factors in classroom settings, supporting prior laboratory research
(Abel and Bäuml 2020; Kang and Pashler 2014).
Feedback Provision and Timing
The majority of experiments provided immediate feedback ( k = 34). Ten experiments did not
include feedback and only four experiments included delayed feedback; two studies did not
report whether feedback was provided. In Fig. 6, effect sizes for immediate feedback are
evenly distributed across small, medium, and large effects. Four studies included delayed
feedback, but only one study had data available to calculate Cohen ’s ds( B j o r ke ta l .2014),
which showed medium to large effects. Studies without feedback resulted in mostly small or
very small effects on learning.
Due to limited reporting in the studies reviewed, we were unable to code for whether
feedback was administered after each initial question, at the end of the quiz, or at the end of the
class session. We were also unable to code for the type of feedback (e.g., correct answer,
Fig. 5 Forest plot of effect sizes (Cohen ’s d) by retrieval practice and final test formats
Educational Psychology Review

elaborative) due to lack of reporting. Thus, we were unable to establish an optimal timing of
feedback in school and classroom settings.
General Discussion
Does retrieval practice improve student learning in school and classroom settings? Based on
our literature review, our response for researchers and educators is an unequivocal “yes.” We
found a wealth of evidence, based on medium to large effect sizes, that retrieval practice
improved learning for a variety of education levels, content areas, experimental designs,
retrieval practice timing, final test delays, retrieval and final test formats, and the timing of
feedback.
Compare Apples to Apples Using Narrower Review Criteria
Our first aim for the present literature review was to compare “apples to apples. ” In other
words, we focused our review on retrieval practice research conducted specifically in
school and classroom settings, and we inte ntionally omitted research conducted in
laboratory settings. After screening nearl y 2000 abstracts, we narrowed our literature
review to 37 studies with 50 experiments and 49 total effect sizes, with a total n = 5374.
Fig. 6 Forest plot of effect sizes (Cohen ’s d) by timing of feedback provided
Educational Psychology Review

The majority of effect sizes (57%) from studies reviewed were medium or large (Cohen ’s
d;F i g . 2).
As is the case for all systematic reviews, ours is subject to publication bias, when
studies with positive outcomes tend to be published to a greater extent than studies with
negative outcomes (Augusteijn et al. 2019;S i m m o n se ta l .2011). As stated by Ferguson
and Heene ( 2012), “[publication bias] is a systemic discipline-wide problem ” in psy-
chology. Specific to research on retrieval practice in classrooms, our search did not
return any studies published before 1999 that met our criteria for inclusion. Furthermore,
we did not include unpublished studies, as the inclusion of unpublished studies can be
ill-defined and thus not reduce publication bias (Ferguson and Heene 2012). Also, new
research on retrieval practice in classroom settings has been published since our search in
January 2018 (e.g., Gurung and Burns 2019). We did, however, find a number of studies
that were not included in previous reviews of research on retrieval practice. We hope that
by making our literature review and Appendix publicly available ( http://osf.io/mz2ks ),
we will increase access to research in this field for both researchers and educators, a
small step toward addressing publication bias.
Future Directions for Research on Retrieval Practice
Our second aim was to inform future research examining retrieval practice. Following our
review of the literature, we provide eight recommendations.
First, the field needs more applied researc h investigating varying delays between
retrieval practice and the final test. We found larger effect sizes at shorter delays (1 –
3 days) and smaller effect sizes at longer delays (end of the semester). In other words,
results from our review of the literature indi cate the opposite of what is typically found
in laboratory studies, where benefits from retrieval practice are larger after longer delays
(Carpenter and Agarwal 2020; Roediger and Karpicke 2006a) .O n ep o s s i b l ee x p l a n a t i o n
for this discrepancy is that the delays in classroom settings are much longer than in
laboratory settings. In the review of the literature on retrieval practice by Adesope et al.
(2017), the majority of studies (64%) had a delay of six or fewer days. Therefore, it may
be the case that benefits from retrieval practice increase in the first few days, and then
taper off as delays approach weeks or months. For both theoretical and practical
considerations, we encourage future research where a range of delays between retrieval
practice and final tests are directly manipulated, ideally ranging from days to weeks to
months. Courses administered online may be particularly suitable for this type of
research.
Second, classroom research specifically investigating the provision and timing of
feedback is needed. Although feedback is a k ey component of educational settings,
classroom studies that directly manipulated feedback (e.g., immediate vs. delayed) were
notably absent from our literature search. The benefits of immediate vs. delayed feedback
also remain unclear in laboratory research Agarwal et al. 2012; Kulik and Kulik 1988;
Metcalfe et al. 2009; Mullet et al. 2014). As was the case for our first recommendation, it
is of both theoretical and practical importa nce to fully understand whether immediate or
delayed feedback produces the largest benefits for student learning. One consideration to
keep in mind is that delayed feedback can present logistical challenges in classroom
settings. Online classes, on the other hand, provide an opportunity to examine delayed
feedback with fewer logistical challenges (Butler et al. 2014).
Educational Psychology Review

Third, comparison conditions for future research on retrieval practice should more
closely mirror common classroom practices. We found that many studies in our literature
review compared retrieval practice to re-reading. It has been well established in both
laboratory and applied research (including res earch in the current review) that retrieval
practice significantly incr eases student learning when compared to re-read exposure
controls (e.g., Atabek Yigit et al. 2014; Dunlosky et al. 2013; McDermott et al. 2014;
Roediger and Karpicke 2006a). More stringent and realistic comparisons to retrieval
practice in classroom settings include traditi onal lectures, flipped classroom activities,
think-pair-share discussions, and stu dent presentations (DeLozier and Rhodes 2017).
Fourth, future research should also examine factors unique to applied settings including
class size (e.g., lecture classes vs. small classes), whether retrieval practice was anticipated
(e.g., “pop quiz ” vs. announced in advance), whether the final test was cumulative, and
whether performance on initial retrieval practice counted toward students ’ grades. We coded
whether final test performance counted toward students ’ grades, but information regarding
grading procedures for initial retrieval practice was not reported in most studies.
Fifth, additional research is needed in non-science content areas, such as skills-based
learning, mathematics, the humanities (writing, literature, essays), and foreign language
vocabulary. Thirty-five out of the 50 experiments reviewed were conducted in science or
psychology courses. We were particularly surprised that none of the experiments meeting our
screening criteria included foreign language learning, considering the frequent use of these
materials in laboratory experiments (Dunlosky et al. 2013).
Sixth, applied research in education should also take into account the role of the
teacher-researcher as a modulating factor for student learning outcomes, also known as
the Hawthorne Effect or “participant reactivity ” (Diaper 1990; Paradis and Sutkin 2017).
This information was inconsistently reporte d in the studies reviewed, unfortunately.
When reported, we found that instructors at the undergraduate level tended to also be
the researchers (e.g., Batsell et al. 2017; Leeming 2002; Lyle and Crawford 2011; Saville
et al. 2012), whereas instructors at the K-12 level were not the researchers (e.g., Agarwal
2019; Karpicke et al. 2014; McDaniel et al. 2011, 2013; McDermott et al. 2014;
Roediger et al. 2011). As such, the role of the teacher-researcher may have contributed
to smaller effect sizes in undergraduate classrooms (Fig. 4). Another possibility for
smaller effect sizes at the undergraduate level may be due to larger sample sizes or the
more frequent use of rephrased questions on fi nal tests. Follow-up studies specifically
comparing K-12, undergraduate, and medical school students could shed light on wheth-
er benefits from retrieval practice are modulated by age in applied settings.
Seventh, collaborative retrieval and online quizzes are common in educational settings
and it would be beneficial to know when and how they increase student learning. While
conducting our literature search, we found num erous educational s tudies conducted
under online or collaborative conditions. While these studies were outside the scope of
our review (both areas of research warrant their own literature reviews), they can add to
our understanding of retrieval practice in real world settings. With online learning, for
example, instructors have more control and fl exibility over the provision, timing, and
frequency of retrieval practice and feedback (Butler et al. 2014). With collaborative
retrieval, a literature review could highlight optimal collaborative groups for a range of
ages, content areas, and metacognitive skills (de Carvalho Filho 2010).
As our final recommendation, applied research on retrieval practice must be conducted with
diverse student populations. We found that only three out of 50 experiments that met our
Educational Psychology Review

screening criteria were conducted outside the USA and Western Europe (Turkey, Pakistan, and
Taiwan), while 94% of classroom research on retrieval practice was conducted in WEIRD
countries (western, educated, industrialized, rich, democratic countries; Henrich et al. 2010).
The discrepancy is clear: non-WEIRD countries account for 88% of the global population, but
only 6% of the sample from the studies reviewed were from non-WEIRD countries (Bauer
2020; Rad et al. 2018).
Based on findings from the present review —retrieval practice consistently improved
learning across a range of ages, content areas, formats, etc. in WEIRD countries —it
stands to reason that retrieval practice would similarly benefit student learning in non-
WEIRD countries. In line with this reasoning, recent research conducted in non-
WEIRD countries suggests that retrieval pr actice improves learning for elementary
school children in Brazil (de Lima and Jaeger 2020) and also for college students in
Hungary (Racsmány et al. 2018), countries that are considered to be low in educa-
tional attainment (OECD 2020). In addition, self-reported study strategies used by
students in Brazil are similar to study strategies used by students in the USA (Ekuni
et al. 2020), and researchers have found limited cross-cultural differences on measures
of working memory (Adams and Hitch 1997; Lan et al. 2011), a cognitive process
engaged during retrieval practice (Agarwal et al. 2017).
While research suggests that retrieval practice may benefit long-term learning for
all learners (WEIRD and non-WEIRD), implementation by students and educators may
be affected by cultural norms. For ex ample, van Egmond, Kühnen, and Li ( 2013)
found that the definition of academic learning varies by culture: in Western cultures,
learning is attributed to the cognitive domain, whereas in Eastern cultures, learning is
associated with the development of the person as a whole; thus, it may be the case
that retrieval practice could be implement ed more frequently in Western cultures
consistent with a cognitive approach. Tweed and Lehman ( 2002) suggested that ideals
of learning that are predominantly Wester n (Socratic) or more Eastern (Confucian)
influence students ’ approaches toward learning, in cluding motivation, effort, and
memorization, all of which are contributing f actors to the implementation of retrieval
practice (Agarwal and Bain 2019). Furthermore, Western c ultures are considered
individualistic or independent because they focus on standing out and being unique,
whereas Eastern cultures are considered co llectivist or interdependent because they
focus on maintaining harmony within the group (Markus and Kitayama 1991); to
speculate, this could affect the extent to which educators implement individual vs.
collaborative retrieval practice. Considering these cultural dynamics, it is possible that
the implementation of retrieval practice in WEIRD countries may be vastly different
from implementation in non-WEIRD countrie s, subsequently modulating benefits from
retrieval practice on student learning.
Lastly, we encourage research on retrie val practice with non-WEIRD students
because an overreliance on WEIRD samples can produce false claims about human
psychology and behavior (Henrich et al. 2010). For example, Henrich and colleagues
found that individuals from WEIRD countries exhibit divergent behaviors compared to
the rest of the world, even for domains that were previously considered to be
universal, such as visual perception, cooperation, spatial reasoning, and moral reason-
ing. As a second example, the autobiographical reminiscence bump is considered to
be a basic memory process, and yet the content of memories differs for individualistic
vs. collectivist cultures (Conway et al. 2005). Third, Segall et al. ( 1966)f o u n dt h a t
Educational Psychology Review

the San foragers of the Kalahari were imm une to the well-known Muller-Lyer visual
illusion, which was previously thought to be fundamental to the human species. If
these researchers had not tested non-WEIRD samples, we might still hold the con-
viction that all humans are susceptib le to the same patterns of behavior.
For these reasons, it would be shortsighted to assume that what is beneficial for
learning in WEIRD count ries is benefi cial for learning in non-WEIRD countries.
Applied research on retrieval practice is needed with students from non-WEIRD
countries if we are to provide accurate recommendations, based on empirical evidence,
for educators and students globally. As a starting point, we urge researchers to report
key demographics, including students ’ age, gender, location, and type of school (e.g.,
public, private, rural, urban). If researche rs are to provide practical recommendations
for educators regarding retrieval practice, then student demographics must be taken
into account (Rad et al. 2018). Educators are eager to know whether retrieval practice
would be beneficial for their specific student population, and also whether these
benefits generalize to all classrooms.
Recommendations for Classroom Implementation of Retrieval Practice
Our third and final aim for the literature review was to identify practical recommen-
dations for educators as they implement ret rieval practice in their classrooms. We had
anticipated the emergence of optimal conditi ons for retrieval practice: content areas,
formats, timing, and so on. However, we did not find any singular or specifically
optimal conditions; instead, we found th at nearly all conditions in schools and
classrooms yielded a benefit from retrieval practice.
We conclude that educators should impleme nt retrieval practice, with less concern
about the precise format or timing of retrieval interventions. Almost all effect sizes (46
out of 49 Cohen ’s d) indicated a positive benefit from retrieval practice under wide-
ranging conditions, and retrieval practice improved student learning to a greater extent
than time spent on other classroom activities (e. g., reviewing material, lectures without
quizzes).
We hope that this literature review provides educators with an accessible resource
when considering implementation of retrieval practice. In our Appendix (available at
http://osf.io/mz2ks ), we have included details for each of the 50 experiments, broken
down by education level, content area, effect sizes, and more. Educators can explore
the retrieval practice research that has been conducted under similar conditions as
their own classroom or school, to inform teaching strategies, professional
development, and curriculum development. By implementing retrieval practice in
schools and classrooms, scientists and e ducators can bridge the gap between
research and practice —and most importantly, transform students ’ long-term learning.
Educational Psychology Review

Table 5 A comparison of 50 experiments on retriev al practice conducted in classroom settings
Abbreviated
Citation
Retrieval Practice
Intervention
Comparison Condition(s) Effect Sizes (Cohen's d)
Asterisk (*) indicates
insufficient data to calculate
effect size
Education
Level
Overall
Content
Area
Course Topic Experimental
Design
(within- or
between-
students)
Asterisk (*)
indicates
random
assignment
Sample
Size
in Final
Analyses
Agarwal
2019,
Experi-
ment 3
Quizzes with mixed
(fact and higher
order) questions
Quizzes with higher
order questions
Questions on the final
assessment only
1.45 [1.15, 1.75] (mixed quizzes
vs. not quizzed;
fact test)
1.30 [1.01, 1.59] (mixed quizzes
vs. not quizzed;
higher order test)
0.84 [0.59, 1.08] (higher order
quizzes vs. not quizzed;
higher order test)
Middle School History World History Within 88
Atabek Yigit
et al.
2014
Quizzes with
feedback
Quizzes without
feedback
Studied a review sheet
No review sheet
Numerical benefit
from retrieval practice
for all comparisons*
Undergraduate Science Introduction to
Chemistry
Within 98
Ayyub and
Mahboob
2017
Quizzes Lessons without quizzes Numerical benefit
from retrieval practice*
Medical
School
Science Endocrinology Between* 84
B a t s e l le ta l .
2017
Textbook reading
with in-class
quizzes
Textbook reading without
quizzes
Numerical benefit
from retrieval practice*
Undergraduate Psychology Introduction to
Psychology
Between 64
Bekkink et
al. 2012
Quizzes Lessons without quizzes 0.24 [0.03, 0.45] Medical
School
Science Introduction to
Pathology
Between* 404
Undergraduate Psychology Within 372
Appendix
Educational Psychology Review

Table 5 (continued)
Abbreviated
Citation
Retrieval Practice
Intervention
Comparison Condition(s) Effect Sizes (Cohen's d)
Asterisk (*) indicates
insufficient data to calculate
effect size
Education
Level
Overall
Content
Area
Course Topic Experimental
Design
(within- or
between-
students)
Asterisk (*)
indicates
random
assignment
Sample
Size
in Final
Analyses
Bjork et al.
2014
Quizzes with
identical questions
repeated
on the final
assessment
Quizzes with
conceptually
related questions
on the final
assessment
Questions on the final
assessment only
0.94 [0.81, 1.06] (identical-repeat
quizzes vs. not quizzed)
0.78 [0.66, 0.89]
(conceptual-repeat quizzes vs.
not quizzed)
Research Methods
in Psychology
Dirkx et al.
2014
Study-test-study-test
(STST)
Study-study-study-study
(SSSS)
1.42 [0.70, 2.13] (final test with
factual questions)
0.96 [0.28, 1.63] (final test with
application questions)
High School Mathematics Statistics Between* 38
Dobson and
Linderho-
lm 2015a
Read-quiz-read-quiz
(RTRT)
Read-generate-read-generate
(RGRG)
Re-read (RRRR)
Numerical benefit
from retrieval practice
for all comparisons*
Undergraduate Science Anatomy and
Physiology
Within 66
Dobson and
Linderho-
lm 2015b
Read-quiz-read
(RTR)
Read-read while taking notes
(R-R+N)
Re-read (RRR)
Numerical benefit
from retrieval practice
for all comparisons*
Undergraduate Science Anatomy and
Physiology
Within 125
Dobson et al.
2017
Free recall over 7
days
Free recall over 2
days
Re-study over 7 days
Re-study over 2 days
Numerical benefit
from retrieval practice
for all comparisons*
Undergraduate Science Anatomy and
Physiology
Within 60
Educational Psychology Review

Table 5 (continued)
Abbreviated
Citation
Retrieval Practice
Intervention
Comparison Condition(s) Effect Sizes (Cohen's d)
Asterisk (*) indicates
insufficient data to calculate
effect size
Education
Level
Overall
Content
Area
Course Topic Experimental
Design
(within- or
between-
students)
Asterisk (*)
indicates
random
assignment
Sample
Size
in Final
Analyses
Free recall in a single
session
Foss and
Pirozzolo
2017,
Experi-
ment 1
4 midterm exams
and 4 pop quizzes
2 midterm exams and 2 pop
quizzes
Numerical benefit
from retrieval practice*
Undergraduate Psychology Research Methods
in Psychology
Between 159
Foss and
Pirozzolo
2017,
Experi-
ment 2
8 course exams 2 course exams Numerical benefit
from retrieval practice*
Undergraduate Psychology Research Methods
in Psychology
Between 70
Foss and
Pirozzolo
2017,
Experi-
ment 3
8c o u r s ee x a m sa n d
additional quizzes
2 course exams 0.25 [-0.23, 0.73] Undergraduate Psychology Research Methods
in Psychology
Between 117
Foss and
Pirozzolo
2017,
Experi-
ment 4
6 quizzes 3 quizzes 0.21 [-0.12, 0.55] Undergraduate Psychology Research Methods
in Psychology
Between 214
Freda and
Lipp
2016
Quizzes Lessons without quizzes Numerical benefit
from retrieval practice*
Medical
School
Skills-Based Dental Diagnosis
and Treatment
Between 338
Cued recall Copying definitions Nume rical benefit Vocabulary Within 129
Educational Psychology Review

Table 5 (continued)
Abbreviated
Citation
Retrieval Practice
Intervention
Comparison Condition(s) Effect Sizes (Cohen's d)
Asterisk (*) indicates
insufficient data to calculate
effect size
Education
Level
Overall
Content
Area
Course Topic Experimental
Design
(within- or
between-
students)
Asterisk (*)
indicates
random
assignment
Sample
Size
in Final
Analyses
Goossens et
al. 2016
from copying definitions* Elementary
School
Spelling and
Vocabu-
lary
Graham
1999
Textbook reading
with in-class
quizzes
Textbook reading without
quizzes
0.27 [0.09, 0.44] Undergraduate Psychology Neuropsychology
and
Psychology of
Learning
Within Not
Re-
ported
Jones et al.
2016,
Experi-
ment 1
Quizzes Rainbow writing 0.6 0 [0.03, 1.18] Elementary
School
Spelling and
Vocabu-
lary
Spelling Within 14
Jones et al.
2016,
Experi-
ment 2
Quizzes Rainbow writing 0.6 9 [0.14, 1.23] Elementary
School
Spelling and
Vocabu-
lary
Spelling Within 16
Jones et al.
2016,
Experi-
ment 3
Quizzes Rainbow writing 1.6 1 [0.73, 2.48] Elementary
School
Spelling and
Vocabu-
lary
Spelling Within 12
Karpicke et
al. 2014,
Experi-
ment 3
Cued recall using a
concept map
Re-study 0.42 [0.20, 0.65] Elementary
School
Science and
History
Earth Science and
U.S. History
Within 85
Graded quizzes
Ungraded quizzes
Lessons without quizzes 0.36 [0.03, 0.69] (ungraded
quizzes vs. no quizzes)
Undergraduate Psychology Introduction to
Psychology,
Between* 277
Educational Psychology Review

Table 5 (continued)
Abbreviated
Citation
Retrieval Practice
Intervention
Comparison Condition(s) Effect Sizes (Cohen's d)
Asterisk (*) indicates
insufficient data to calculate
effect size
Education
Level
Overall
Content
Area
Course Topic Experimental
Design
(within- or
between-
students)
Asterisk (*)
indicates
random
assignment
Sample
Size
in Final
Analyses
Khanna and
Cortese
2016
0.28 [-0.05, 0.61] (graded quizzes
vs. no quizzes)
Cognitive
Psychology,
and Research
Methods
Khanna
2015
Graded quizzes
Ungraded quizzes
Lessons without quizzes 0.32 [-0.09, 0.72] (ungraded
quizzes vs. no quizzes)
-0.27 [-0.68, 0.14] (graded
quizzes vs. no quizzes)
Undergraduate Psychology Introduction to
Psychology
Between* 137
Kromann et
al. 2009
Scenario-based quiz Sc enario lectures without
quizzes
Numerical benefit
from retrieval practice*
Medical
School
Skills-Based CPR Skills Between* 81
Kromann et
al. 2010
Scenario-based quiz Sc enario lectures without
quizzes
0.39 [-0.02, 0.79] Medical
School
Skills-Based CPR Skills Between* 89
Kromann et
al. 2011
Scenario-based quiz Sc enario lectures without
quizzes
0.55 [0.21, 0.89] Medical
School
Skills-Based CPR Skills Between* 138
Larsen et al.
2009
Quizzes Studied a review sheet 0.62 [0.27, 0.96] Medical
School
Science Neurology Within 40
Larsen et al.
2013a
Quizzes with
self-explanations
Quizzes without
self-explanations
Studied a review sheet with
self-explanations
Studied a review sheet
without self-explanations
0.70 [0.38, 1.01] (quizzes with
self-explanation
vs. study with self-explanation)
0.48 [0.18, 0.77] (quizzes without
self-explanation
vs. study with self-explanation)
Numerical benefit from retrieval
practice
for remaining comparisons*
Medical
School
Science Neurology Within 49
Educational Psychology Review

Table 5 (continued)
Abbreviated
Citation
Retrieval Practice
Intervention
Comparison Condition(s) Effect Sizes (Cohen's d)
Asterisk (*) indicates
insufficient data to calculate
effect size
Education
Level
Overall
Content
Area
Course Topic Experimental
Design
(within- or
between-
students)
Asterisk (*)
indicates
random
assignment
Sample
Size
in Final
Analyses
Larsen et al.
2013b
Quizzes with
standardized
patients (SP)
Quizzes with written
questions
Studied a review sheet 0.80 [0.44, 1.15] (SP quiz vs.
study; final SP test)
0.69 [0.35, 1.03] (SP quiz vs.
study; final written test)
0.33 [0.02, 0.65] (written quiz vs.
study; final SP test)
0.72 [0.37, 1.06] (written quiz vs.
study; final written test)
Medical
School
Science Neurology Within 41
Leeming
2002
Quizzes every class 4 course exams 0.47 [0.01, 0.94] Undergraduate Psychology Introduction to
Psychology
and
Psychology of
Learning
Between 192
Lyle and
Crawford
2011
Quizzes Lessons without quizzes Numerical benefit
from retrieval practice*
Undergraduate Mathematics Statistics for
Psychology
Between 144
McDaniel et
al. 2011,
Experi-
ment 1
Quizzes Questions on the final
assessment only
Numerical benefit
from retrieval practice*
Middle School Science Biology Within 92
McDaniel et
al. 2011,
Experi-
ment 2a
Immediate quizzes
Delayed quizzes
Questions on the final
assessment only
0.48 [0.22, 0.74] (immediate
quizzes vs. not quizzed)
0.89 [0.60, 1.18] (delayed quizzes
vs. not quizzed)
Middle School Science Astronomy Within 65
Immediate quizzes Middle School Science Within 54
Educational Psychology Review

Table 5 (continued)
Abbreviated
Citation
Retrieval Practice
Intervention
Comparison Condition(s) Effect Sizes (Cohen's d)
Asterisk (*) indicates
insufficient data to calculate
effect size
Education
Level
Overall
Content
Area
Course Topic Experimental
Design
(within- or
between-
students)
Asterisk (*)
indicates
random
assignment
Sample
Size
in Final
Analyses
McDaniel et
al. 2011,
Experi-
ment 2b
Delayed quizzes Questions on the final
assessment only
0.53 [0.25, 0.82] (immediate
quizzes vs. not quizzed)
0.58 [0.29, 0.87] (delayed quizzes
vs. not quizzed)
Biology and
Chemistry
McDaniel et
al. 2013,
Experi-
ment 1
Quizzes with
definition
questions
Quizzes with key
term questions
Questions on the final
assessment only
Numerical benefit
from retrieval practice
for all comparisons*
Middle School Science Biology and
Physics
Within 61
McDaniel et
al. 2013,
Experi-
ment 2
Quizzes with
definition
questions
Quizzes with key
term questions
Questions on the final
assessment only
Numerical benefit
from retrieval practice
for all comparisons*
Middle School Science E arth Science Within 90
McDermott
et al.
2014,
Experi-
ment 1a
Quizzes with
multiple-choice
questions
Quizzes with short
answer questions
Questions on the final
assessment only
0.87 [0.52, 1.21] (multiple-choice
quizzes vs. not quizzed; final
test with short answer
questions)
0.48 [0.17, 0.79] (short answer
quizzes vs. not quizzed; final
test with short answer
questions)
Numerical benefit from retrieval
practice (multiple-choice
quizzes vs. not quizzed; final
Middle School Science E arth Science Within 45
Educational Psychology Review

Table 5 (continued)
Abbreviated
Citation
Retrieval Practice
Intervention
Comparison Condition(s) Effect Sizes (Cohen's d)
Asterisk (*) indicates
insufficient data to calculate
effect size
Education
Level
Overall
Content
Area
Course Topic Experimental
Design
(within- or
between-
students)
Asterisk (*)
indicates
random
assignment
Sample
Size
in Final
Analyses
test with multiple-choice
questions)
Equivalent means for retrieval
practice and comparison
conditions (short answer
quizzes vs. not quizzed; final
test with multiple-choice
questions)
McDermott
et al.
2014,
Experi-
ment 1b
Quizzes with
multiple-choice
questions
Quizzes with short
answer questions
Questions on the final
assessment only
Numerical benefit
from retrieval practice
for all comparisons*
Middle School Science Biology Within 45
McDermott
et al.
2014,
Experi-
ment 2
Quizzes Re-study
Questions on the final
assessment only
1.58 [1.19, 1.97] (quizzes vs.
re-study)
2.19 [1.71, 2.66] (quizzes vs. not
quizzed)
Middle School Science Biology and
Physics
Within 59
McDermott
et al.
2014,
Experi-
ment 3
Quizzes with
multiple-choice
questions
Quizzes with short
answer questions
Re-study
Questions on the final
assessment only
Numerical benefit
from retrieval practice
for all comparisons*
Middle School Scienc e Biology and Earth
Science
Within 60
McDermott
et al.
Questions on the final
assessment only
Numerical benefit
from retrieval practice
High School History U.S. and World
History
Within 40
Educational Psychology Review

Table 5 (continued)
Abbreviated
Citation
Retrieval Practice
Intervention
Comparison Condition(s) Effect Sizes (Cohen's d)
Asterisk (*) indicates
insufficient data to calculate
effect size
Education
Level
Overall
Content
Area
Course Topic Experimental
Design
(within- or
between-
students)
Asterisk (*)
indicates
random
assignment
Sample
Size
in Final
Analyses
2014,
Experi-
ment 4
Quizzes with
multiple-choice
questions
Quizzes with short
answer questions
for all comparisons*
Michaels
2017
Quizzes (freshmen
and sophomores)
Quizzes (juniors and
seniors)
Lessons without quizzes 0.44 [0.07, 0.82] (freshmen and
sophomores)
-0.30 [-1.05, 0.46] (juniors and
seniors)
Undergraduate Psychology Introduction to
Psychology
Between 139
Narloch et
al. 2006
Pre-lecture quizzes
with matching
questions
Pre-lecture quizzes
with
fill-in-the-blank
questions
Lessons without quizzes Numerical benefit
from retrieval practice
for all comparisons*
Undergraduate Psychology Sensation and
Perception
Between 109
Roediger et
al. 2011,
Experi-
ment 1
Quizzes Questions on the final
assessment only
Numerical benefit
from retrieval practice*
Middle School History World History Within 36
Roediger et
al. 2011,
Experi-
ment 2
Quizzes Re-study
Questions on the final
assessment only
0.83 [0.54, 1.12] (quizzes vs.
re-study)
0.96 [0.66, 1.25] (quizzes vs. not
quizzed)
Middle School History World History Within 63
Quizzes Lessons without quizzes No numerical benefit Undergraduate Psychology Within 58
Educational Psychology Review

Table 5 (continued)
Abbreviated
Citation
Retrieval Practice
Intervention
Comparison Condition(s) Effect Sizes (Cohen's d)
Asterisk (*) indicates
insufficient data to calculate
effect size
Education
Level
Overall
Content
Area
Course Topic Experimental
Design
(within- or
between-
students)
Asterisk (*)
indicates
random
assignment
Sample
Size
in Final
Analyses
Saville et al.
2012
from retrieval practice* Psychology of
Learning
Shapiro and
Gordon
2012
Quizzes Questions on the final
assessment only
0.38 [0.25, 0.52] Undergraduate Psychology Introduction to
Psychology
Within 226
Son and
Rivas
2016
Quizzes Studied a review sheet 0.4 5 [0.17, 0.73] (final test with
repeated questions)
0.14 [-0.14, 0.42] (final test with
transfer questions)
Undergraduate Psychology Developmental
Psychology
Between 209
Stenlund et
al. 2017
Quizzes Discussion with feedback
Discussion without feedback
1.54 [0.99, 2.08] (quizzes vs.
discussion with feedback;
final test with complex questions)
0.69 [0.20, 1.18] (quizzes vs.
discussion with feedback;
final test with factual questions)
1.06 [0.54, 1.59] (quizzes vs.
discussion without feedback;
final test with complex questions)
0.72 [0.21, 1.23] (quizzes vs.
discussion without feedback;
final test with factual questions)
High School Psychology Psychology of
Emotions
Between* 98
Tu et al.
2017
Quizzes Lessons without quizzes -0.24 [-0.67, 0.19] Medical
School
Skills-Based Fundamentals of
Nursing
Between 84
Educational Psychology Review

Table 5 (continued)
Abbreviated
Citation
Conducted
in the
United
States
Retrieval Practice Timing Delay Between the
Last Retrieval Opportunity
and the Final Test
Retrieval Practice
Format
Feedback
After
Retrieval
Practice
Final Test Format
Asterisk (*)
indicates
rephrased final
test questions
Final Test
Peformance
Counted
Toward
Students'
Grades
Abbreviated
Citation
Conducted
in the
United
States
Retrieval Practice Timing Delay Between the
Last Retrieval Opportunity
and the Final Test
Retrieval Practice
Format
Feedback
After
Retrieval
Practice
Final Test Format
Asterisk (*)
indicates
rephrased final
test questions
Final Test
Peformance
Counted
Toward
Students'
Grades
Agarwal 2019,
Experiment 3
Yes Three times within 1 week 2 days Multiple-choic e Immediate Multiple-choice* No
Atabek Yigit et al.
2014
No (Turkey) Once within a single session 1 day Multiple-choice and
matching
Immediate Multiple-choice
and matching
No
Ayyub and
Mahboob 2017
No
(Pakistan)
Once per week for 4 weeks 1 week Multiple-choice Not
report-
ed
Multiple-choice* Yes
B a t s e l le ta l .2017 Yes Twice per week throughout the semester (timing
not specified)
Three exams throughout
the semester (timing not
specified)
Not Reported Immediate Multiple-choice* Yes
Bekkink et al.
2012
No (The
Nether-
lands)
1-2 times per week for 4 weeks 3 days Multiple-choice and
short answer
None Multiple-choice* Yes
Bjork et al. 2014 Yes Once every 2 weeks for 10 weeks End of the 10-week c ourse Multiple-choice Delay ed Multiple-choice* Yes
Dirkx et al. 2014 No (The
Nether-
lands)
Once within a single session 1 week Short answer None Short answer No
Dobson and
Linderholm
2015a
Yes Twice within a single session Immediate Free recall None Free recall No
Yes Once within a single session Immediate Free recall None Multiple-choice No
Educational Psychology Review

Table 5 (continued)
Abbreviated
Citation
Conducted
in the
United
States
Retrieval Practice Timing Delay Between the
Last Retrieval Opportunity
and the Final Test
Retrieval Practice
Format
Feedback
After
Retrieval
Practice
Final Test Format
Asterisk (*)
indicates
rephrased final
test questions
Final Test
Peformance
Counted
Toward
Students'
Grades
Dobson and
Linderholm
2015b
Dobson et al. 2017 Yes Six times within 7 days Immediate Free recall None Free recall No
Foss and Pirozzolo
2017,
Experiment 1
Yes Once every 2 weeks for 15 weeks End o f the 15-week course Multiple-choice and
short answer
None Multiple-choice
and short
answer
Yes
Foss and Pirozzolo
2017,
Experiment 2
Yes Once every 2 weeks for 15 weeks End o f the 15-week course Multiple-choice and
short answer
None Multiple-choice
and short
answer
Yes
Foss and Pirozzolo
2017,
Experiment 3
Yes Once every 2 weeks for 15 weeks End o f the 15-week course Multiple-choice and
short answer
None Multiple-choice
and short
answer*
Yes
Foss and Pirozzolo
2017,
Experiment 4
Yes Once every 2 weeks for 15 weeks 7-10 days Short answer None Short answer* Yes
Freda and Lipp
2016
Yes Once per week for 6 weeks End of the 6-week course Simulated diagnosis Delayed Simulated
diagnosis*
Yes
Goossens et al.
2016
No (The
Nether-
lands)
Six times total for 1-2 weeks 1-3 days Cued recall Immediate Cued recall Not
reported
Graham 1999 Yes 10 times throughout t he semester (timing not
specified)
End of the semester Multiple-choice and
fill-in-the-blank
Not
Report-
ed
Multiple-choice
and
fill-in-the--
blank*
Yes
Jones et al. 2016,
Experiment 1
Yes Twice within 8 days 1 day Free recall Immediate Free recall Yes
Yes Twice within 8 days 1 day Free recall Immediate Free recall Yes
Educational Psychology Review

Table 5 (continued)
Abbreviated
Citation
Conducted
in the
United
States
Retrieval Practice Timing Delay Between the
Last Retrieval Opportunity
and the Final Test
Retrieval Practice
Format
Feedback
After
Retrieval
Practice
Final Test Format
Asterisk (*)
indicates
rephrased final
test questions
Final Test
Peformance
Counted
Toward
Students'
Grades
Jones et al. 2016,
Experiment 2
Jones et al. 2016,
Experiment 3
Yes Twice within 8 days 1 day Free recall Immediate Free recall Yes
Karpicke et al.
2014,
Experiment 3
Yes Once within a single session Immediate Short answer None Free recall No
Khanna and
Cortese 2016
Yes Six times throughout the semester (timing not
specified)
End of the semester Multiple-choic e Immediate Multiple-choice* Yes
Khanna 2015 Yes Six times throughout the semester (timing not
specified)
End of the semester Multiple-choic e Immediate Multiple-choice* Yes
Kromann et al.
2009
No
(Den-
mark)
Once within a single session 2 weeks Simu lated diagnosis Imm ediate Simulated
diagnosis
No
Kromann et al.
2010
No
(Den-
mark)
Once within a single session 6 months Sim ulated diagnosis Imm ediate Simulated
diagnosis
No
Kromann et al.
2011
No
(Den-
mark)
Once within a single session 2 weeks Simu lated diagnosis Imm ediate Simulated
diagnosis
No
Larsen et al. 2009 Yes Three times within a single session 6 months Short answer Immediate Short answer No
Larsen et al. 2013a Yes Four times within 2 days 6 months Short answer Immediate Essay* No
Larsen et al. 2013b Yes Four times within a single session 6 months Simulated diagnosis
and a short
answer quiz
Immediate Simulated
diagnosis
and a short
answer test*
No
Leeming 2002
Yes 6 weeks Short ans wer Immediate No
Educational Psychology Review

Table 5 (continued)
Abbreviated
Citation
Conducted
in the
United
States
Retrieval Practice Timing Delay Between the
Last Retrieval Opportunity
and the Final Test
Retrieval Practice
Format
Feedback
After
Retrieval
Practice
Final Test Format
Asterisk (*)
indicates
rephrased final
test questions
Final Test
Peformance
Counted
Toward
Students'
Grades
5 times per week for 5 weeks (summer semester)
or 2 times per week for 12 weeks (regular
semester)
Short answer,
multiple--
choice,
and
fill-in-the--
blank
Lyle and Crawford
2011
Yes Once per week for 21 weeks Four exams throughout the
semester (timing not
specified)
Fill-in-the-blank Delaye d Multiple-choice* Yes
McDaniel et al.
2011,
Experiment 1
Yes Three times within 20 days 1 day Multiple -choice Immediate Multiple-choice Yes
McDaniel et al.
2011,
Experiment 2a
Yes 1-3 times within 3-8 days 1 day Multiple -choice Immediate Multiple-choice Yes
McDaniel et al.
2011,
Experiment 2b
Yes 1-3 times within 1-4 days 1 day Multiple -choice Immediate Multiple-choice Yes
McDaniel et al.
2013,
Experiment 1
Yes Three times within 11 days 1 day Multiple -choice Immediate Mu ltiple-choice* Yes
McDaniel et al.
2013,
Experiment 2
Yes Three times within 16 days 1 day Multiple -choice Immediate Mu ltiple-choice* Yes
M c D e r m o t te ta l .
2014,
Experiment 1a
Yes Three times within 22 da ys 1 day Multiple-choice and
short answer
Immediate Multiple-choice
and short
answer
Yes
Yes Three times within 7 d ays 1 day Immediate Yes
Educational Psychology Review

Table 5 (continued)
Abbreviated
Citation
Conducted
in the
United
States
Retrieval Practice Timing Delay Between the
Last Retrieval Opportunity
and the Final Test
Retrieval Practice
Format
Feedback
After
Retrieval
Practice
F i n a lT e s tF o r m a t
Asterisk (*)
indicates
rephrased final
test questions
Final Test
Peformance
Counted
Toward
Students'
Grades
M c D e r m o t te ta l .
2014,
Experiment 1b
Multiple-choice and
short answer
Multiple-choice
and short
answer
M c D e r m o t te ta l .
2014,
Experiment 2
Yes Three times within 7 days 1 day Short answer Immediate Short answer Yes
M c D e r m o t te ta l .
2014,
Experiment 3
Yes Twice within 7 days 2-3 days Multiple-choice and
short answer
Immediate Multiple-choice
and short
answer*
Yes
M c D e r m o t te ta l .
2014,
Experiment 4
Yes Twice within 8 days 1-2 days Multiple-choice and
short answer
Immediate Multiple-choice
and short
answer*
Yes
Michaels 2017 Yes Once per week for 16 weeks Three exams throughout
the semester (timing not
specified)
Multiple-choice and
diagram labeling
Immediate Multiple-choice No
Narloch et al. 2006 Yes Multiple times through out the semester (timing
not specified)
Exams at the end of each
chapter (timing not
specified)
Fill-in-the-blank and
matching
Delayed Multiple-choice
and essay*
Yes
Roediger et al.
2011,
Experiment 1
Yes Three times within 13 days 2 days Multiple-choice Immediate Free recall Yes
Roediger et al.
2011,
Experiment 2
Yes Three times within 11 days 2 days Multiple-choice Imme diate Multiple-choice Yes
Saville et al. 2012 Yes Nine times throughout the semester (timing not
specified)
2 days Multiple-choice I mmediate Multiple-choice
and short
answer*
Yes
Yes Three times per week for 15 weeks Multiple-choice Imme diate Multiple-choice* Yes
Educational Psychology Review

Table 5 (continued)
Abbreviated
Citation
Conducted
in the
United
States
Retrieval Practice Timing Delay Between the
Last Retrieval Opportunity
and the Final Test
Retrieval Practice
Format
Feedback
After
Retrieval
Practice
Final Test Format
Asterisk (*)
indicates
rephrased final
test questions
Final Test
Peformance
Counted
Toward
Students'
Grades
Shapiro and
Gordon 2012
Four exams throughout the
semester (timing not
specified)
Son and Rivas
2016
Yes 1-3 times per week for 10 weeks 1 week Multipl e-choice Immediate Multiple-choice* Yes
Stenlund et al.
2017
No
(Sweden)
Twice per day for 2 days Three exams over 4 weeks Short answer Immediate Short answer Not
reported
Tu et al. 2017 No (Taiwan) Every class mee ting throughout the semester
(timing not specified)
End of the semester Multiple-choi ce Immediate Multiple-choice Yes
Educational Psychology Review

Acknowledgements We would like to thank Henry L. Roediger, III and Doug Rohrer for valuable discussions,
as well four anonymous reviewers for their feedback. We also thank Tarah Collins, Jessica Bailey, Erin Eberly,
Makayla Miller, Emily Glassman, and Lauren Stephen for their assistance. This project is registered on the Open
Science Framework (OSF) and publicly available at http://osf.io/mz2ks.
Author Contribution Pooja Agarwal developed the idea for this literature review. Pooja Agarwal and Ludmila
Nunes developed the methodology and coding procedure. Ludmila Nunes developed the search syntax and
executed the search of databases. All authors screened abstracts, Ludmila Nunes downloaded all articles that
passed detailed screening, and all authors coded the articles. Ludmila Nunes calculated effect sizes and created
the forest plots. Pooja Agarwal drafted the manuscript, which was edited by Ludmila Nunes and Janell Blunt. All
authors have approved the submitted manuscript.
Data Availability All data are available at
http://osf.io/mz2ks
Code Availability Syntax used for the literature search is listed in Table 1 in the manuscript.
Declarations Because our manuscript is a literature review, human subjects approval was not required. This
research is not under consideration at other journals.
Conflict of Interest The authors declare no competing interests.
References
*References with an Asterisk Indicate Studies Included in the Review
Abel, M., & Bäuml, K. T. (2020). Would you like to learn more? Retrieval practice plus feedback can increase
motivation to keep on studying. Cognition, 201, 104316. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cognition.2020.104316.
Adams, J. W., & Hitch, G. J. (1997). Working memory and children’s mental addition. Journal of Experimental
Child Psychology, 67(1), 21–38.
Adesope, O. O., Trevisan, D. A., & Sundararajan, N. (2017). Rethinking the use of tests: a meta-analysis of
practice testing. Review of Educational Research, 87(3), 659–701.
*Agarwal, P. K. (2019). Retrieval practice and Bloom ’s taxonomy: do students need fact knowledge before
higher order learning? Journal of Educational Psychology, 111, 2 189 –209.
Agarwal, P. K., & Bain, P. M. (2019).Powerful teaching: unleash the science of learning. San Francisco: Jossey-
Bass.
Agarwal, P. K., Bain, P. M., & Chamberlain, R. W. (2012). The value of applied research: retrieval practice
improves classroom learning and recommendations from a teacher, a principal, and a scientist. Educational
Psychology Review, 24(3), 437–448.
Agarwal, P. K., D’Antonio, L., Roediger, H. L., McDermott, K. B., & McDaniel, M. A. (2014). Classroom-based
programs of retrieval practice reduce middle school and high school students ’ test anxiety. Journal of
Applied Research in Memory and Cognition, 3(3), 131–139.
Agarwal, P. K., Finley, J. R., Rose, N. S., & Roediger, H. L. (2017). Benefits from retrieval practice are greater
for students with lower working memory capacity. Memory, 25(6), 764–771.
Allen, I. E., Seaman, J., Poulin, R., & Straut, T. T. (2016). Online report card: tracking online education in the
United States. Babson Survey Research Group. https://files.eric.ed.gov/fulltext/ED572777.pdf
Anderson, C. A., Lindsay, J. J., & Bushman, B. J. (1999). Research in the psychological laboratory: truth or
triviality? Current Directions in Psychological Science, 8(1), 3–9.
*Atabek Yigit, E., Balkan Kiyici, F., & Çetinkaya, G. (2014). Evaluating the testing effect in the classroom: an
effective way to retrieve learned information. Eurasian Journal of Educational Research, 54, 99–116.
Augusteijn, H. E., van Aert, R., & van Assen, M. A. (2019). The effect of publication bias on the Q test and
assessment of heterogeneity. Psychological Methods, 24(1), 116–134.
*Ayyub, A., & Mahboob, U. (2017). Effectiveness of test-enhanced learning (TEL) in lectures for undergraduate
medical students. Pakistan Journal of Medical Sciences, 33, 1339.
Educational Psychology Review

Bangert-Drowns, R. L., Kulik, J. A., & Kulik, C.-L. C. (1991). Effects of frequent classroom testing. Journal of
Educational Research, 85,8 9–99.
*Batsell, W. R., Perry, J. L., Hanley, E., & Hostetter, A. B. (2017). Ecological validity of the testing effect: the
use of daily quizzes in introductory psychology. Teaching of Psychology, 44, 18 –23.
Bauer, P. J. (2020). Expanding the reach of psychological science [Editorial]. Psychological Science, 31,3 –5.
Becker-Blease, K. A., & Bostwick, K. C. P. (2016). Adaptive quizzing in introductory psychology: evidence of
limited effectiveness. Scholarship of Teaching and Learning in Psychology, 2(1), 75–86.
*Bekkink, M. O., Donders, R., van Muijen, G. N., & Ruiter, D. J. (2012). Challenging medical students with an
interim assessment: a positive effect on formal examination score in a randomized controlled study.
Advances in Health Sciences Education, 17, 27–37.
*Bjork, E. L., Little, J. L., & Storm, B. C. (2014). Multiple-choice testing as a desirable difficulty in the
classroom. Journal of Applied Research in Memory and Cognition, 3, 165 –170.
Bojnova, E. D., & Oigara, J. N. (2011). Teaching and learning with clickers: are clickers good for students.
Interdisciplinary Journal of E-Learning and Learning Objects, 7, 169–184.
Brame, C. J., & Biel, R. (2015). Test-enhanced learning: the potential for testing to promote greater learning in
undergraduate science courses. CBE Life Sciences Education, 14,1 –12.
Brown, P. C., Roediger, H. L., & McDaniel, M. A. (2014). Make it stick: the science of successful learning .
Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
Burdo, J., & O ’Dwyer, L. (2015). The effectiveness of concept mapping and retrieval practice as learning
strategies in an undergraduate physiology course. Advances in Physiology Education, 39,3 3 5–340.
Butler, A. C. (2010). Repeated testing produces superior transfer of learning relative to repeated studying.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 36,1 1 1 8–1133.
Butler, A. C., & Carpenter, S. K. (2015). Separating myth from reality in education: introduction to the special
issue. Educational Psychology Review, 27,5 6 3–565.
Butler, A. C., Marsh, E. J., Slavinsky, J. P., & Baraniuk, R. G. (2014). Integrating cognitive science and
technology improves learning in a STEM classroom. Educational Psychology Review, 26(2), 331–340.
Carpenter, S. K., & Agarwal, P. K. (2020). How to use spaced retrieval practice to boost learning. http://www.
retrievalpractice.org
Carpenter, S. K., Pashler, H., & Cepeda, N. J. (2009). Using tests to enhance 8th grade students’ retention of U.S.
history facts. Applied Cognitive Psychology, 23(6), 760–771.
Carpenter, S. K., Lund, T. J. S., Coffman, C. R., Armstrong, P. I., Lamm, M. H., & Reason, R. D. (2016). A
classroom study on the relationship between student achievement and retrieval-enhanced learning.
Educational Psychology Review, 28(2), 353–375.
Carter, E. C., Schönbrodt, F. D., Gervais, W. M., & Hilgard, J. (2019). Correcting for bias in psychology: a
comparison of meta-analytic methods. Advances in Methods and Practices in Psychological Science, 2 (2),
115–144.
Cohen, J. (1988). Statistical power analysis for the behavioral sciences(2nd ed.). Hillsdale: Lawrence Earlbaum
Associates.
Conway, M. A., Wang, Q., Hanyu, K., & Haque, S. (2005). A cross-cultural investigation of autobiographical
memory: on the universality and cultural variation of the reminiscence bump. Journal of Cross-Cultural
Psychology, 36,7 3 9–749.
Coyne, J. H., Borg, J. M., DeLuca, J., Glass, L., & Sumowski, J. F. (2015). Retrieval practice as an effective
memory strategy in children and adolescents with traumatic brain injury.Archives of Physical Medicine and
Rehabilitation, 96,7 4 2–745.
Cranney, J., Ahn, M., McKinnon, R., Morris, S., & Watts, K. (2009). The testing effect, collaborative learning,
and retrieval-induced facilitation in a classroom setting. European Journal of Cognitive Psychology, 21 ,
919–940.
Daniel, D. B., & Broida, J. (2004). Using web-based quizzing to improve exam performance: lessons learned.
Teaching of Psychology, 31,2 0 7–208.
de Carvalho Filho, M. K. (2010). Assessing changes in performance and monitoring processes in individual and
collaborative tests according to students’ metacognitive skills. European Journal of Cognitive Psychology,
22, 1107–1136.
de Lima, N. K., & Jaeger, A. (2020). The effects of prequestions versus postquestions on memory retention in
children. Journal of Applied Research in Memory and Cognition, 9 , 555–563.
DeLozier, S. J., & Rhodes, M. G. (2017). Flipped classrooms: a review of key ideas and recommendations for
practice. Educational Psychology Review, 29,1 4 1–151.
Diaper, G. (1990). The Hawthorne effect: a fresh examination. Educational Studies, 16,2 6 1–267.
*Dirkx, K. J., Kester, L., & Kirschner, P. A. (2014). The testing effect for learning principles and procedures
from texts. The Journal of Educational Research, 107, 357 –364.
Educational Psychology Review

*Dobson, J. L., & Linderholm, T. (2015a). The effect of selected “desirable difficulties” on the ability to recall
anatomy information. Anatomical Sciences Education, 8, 395–403.
*Dobson, J. L., & Linderholm, T. (2015b). Self-testing promotes superior retention of anatomy and physiology
information. Advances in Health Sciences Education, 20, 149–161.
*Dobson, J. L., Perez, J., & Linderholm, T. (2017). Distributed retrieval practice promotes superior recall of
anatomy information. Anatomical Sciences Education, 10, 339–347.
Duchastel, P. C. (1979). Retention of prose materials: the effect of testing. The Journal of Education Research,
72,2 9 9–300.
Dunlosky, J., & Rawson, K. A. (Eds.) (2019). The Cambridge handbook of cognition and education. Cambridge
University Press.
Dunlosky, J., Rawson, K. A., Marsh, E. J., Nathan, M. J., & Willingham, D. T. (2013). Improving students ’
learning with effective learning techniques: promising directions from cognitive and educational psycholo-
gy. Psychological Science in the Public Interest, 14,4 –58.
Eisenkraemer, R. E., Jaeger, A., & Stein, L. M. (2013). A systematic review of the testing effect in learning.
Paidéia, 23, 397–406.
Ekuni, R., de Souza, B. M. N., Agarwal, P. K., & Pompeia, S. (2020). A conceptual replication of survey
research on study strategies in a diverse, non-WEIRD student population. Scholarship of Teaching and
Learning in Psychology. https://. https://doi.org/10.1037/stl0000191.
Fazio, L. K., & Marsh, E. J. (2019). Retrieval-based learning in children. Current Directions in Psychological
Science, 28, 111–116.
Ferguson, C. J., & Heene, M. (2012). A vast graveyard of undead theories: publication bias and psychological
science’s aversion to the null. Perspectives on Psychological Science, 7,5 5 5–561.
*Foss, D. J., & Pirozzolo, J. W. (2017). Four semesters investigating frequency of testing, the testing effect, and
transfer of training. Journal of Educational Psychology, 109, 1067.
Francis, A. P., Wieth, M. B., Zabel, K. L., & Carr, T. H. (2020). A classroom study on the role of prior
knowledge and retrieval tool in the testing effect. Psychology Learning & Teaching. Advance online
publication. https://doi.org/10.1177/1475725720924872.
*Freda, N. M., & Lipp, M. J. (2016). Test-enhanced learning in competence-based predoctoral orthodontics: a
four-year study. Journal of Dental Education, 80, 348–354.
Gates, A. I. (1917). Recitation as a factor in memorizing. Archives of Psychology,6 ( 4 0 ) .
Glover, J. A. (1989). The “testing” phenomenon: not gone but nearly forgotten. Journal of Educational
Psychology, 81,3 9 2–399.
*Goossens, N. A., Camp, G., Verkoeijen, P. P., Tabbers, H. K., Bouwmeester, S., & Zwaan, R. A. (2016).
Distributed practice and retrieval practice in primary school vocabulary learning: a multi-classroom study.
Applied Cognitive Psychology, 30, 700–712.
*Graham, R. B. (1999). Unannounced quizzes raise test scores selectively for mid-range students. Teaching of
Psychology, 26, 271–273.
Green, M. L., Moeller, J. J., & Spak, J. M. (2018). Test-enhanced learning in health professions education: a
systematic review. Medical Teacher, 40,3 3 7–350.
Gurung, R. A. R., & Burns, K. (2019). Putting evidence‐based claims to the test: A multi‐site classroom study of
retrieval practice and spaced practice. Applied Cognitive Psychology, 33, 732–743.
Hartwig, M. K., & Dunlosky, J. (2012). Study strategies of college students: are self-testing and scheduling
related to achievement? Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 19, 126–134.
Henrich, J., Heine, S. J., & Norenzayan, A. (2010). The weirdest people in the world? Behavioral and Brain
Sciences, 33,1 –75.
Jaeger, A., Eisenkraemer, R. E., & Stein, L. M. (2015). Test-enhanced learning in third-grade children.
Educational Psychology, 35,5 1 3–521.
*Jones, A. C., Wardlow, L., Pan, S. C., Zepeda, C., Heyman, G. D., Dunlosky, J., & Rickard, T. C. (2016).
Beyond the rainbow: retrieval practice leads to better spelling than does rainbow writing. Educational
Psychology Review, 28, 385–400.
Kang, S. H. K., & Pashler, H. (2014). Is the benefit of retrieval practice modulated by motivation? Journal of
Applied Research in Memory and Cognition, 3(3), 183–188.
Karpicke, J. D. (2012). Retrieval-based learning: active retrieval promotes meaningful learning. Current
Directions in Psychological Science, 21(3), 157–163.
Karpicke, J. D., & Grimaldi, P. J. (2012). Retrieval-based learning: a perspective for enhancing meaningful
learning. Educational Psychology Review, 24(3), 401–418.
Karpicke, J. D., Butler, A. C., & Roediger, H. L. (2009). Metacognitive strategies in student learning: do students
practice retrieval when they study on their own? Memory, 17, 471–479.
Educational Psychology Review

*Karpicke, J. D., Blunt, J. R., Smith, M. A., & Karpicke, S. S. (2014). Retrieval-based learning: the need for
guided retrieval in elementary school children. Journal of Applied Research in Memory and Cognition, 3,
198–206.
Karpicke, J. D., Blunt, J. R., & Smith, M. A. (2016). Retrieval-based learning: positive effects of retrieval
practice in elementary school children. Frontiers in Psychology, 7,1 –9.
Kelley, K. (2007a). Methods for the behavioral, educational, and social sciences: an R package. Behavior
Research Methods, 39(4), 979–984.
Kelley, K. (2007b). Confidence intervals for standardized effect sizes: theory, application, and implementation.
Journal of Statistical Software, 20,1 –24.
Kelley, K. (2017). MBESS (version 4.0.0 and higher) [computer software and manual]. http://cran.r-project.org
*Khanna, M. M. (2015). Ungraded pop quizzes: test-enhanced learning without all the anxiety. Teaching of
Psychology, 42, 174–178.
*Khanna, M. M., & Cortese, M. J. (2016). The benefits of quizzing in content-focused versus skills-focused
courses. Scholarship of Teaching and Learning in Psychology, 2, 87, 1.
Kibble, J. (2007). Use of unsupervised online quizzes as formative assessment in a medical physiology course:
effects of incentives on student participation and performance.Advances in Physiology Education, 31,2 5 3–
260.
Kornell, N., Rabelo, V. C., & Klein, P. C. (2012). Tests enhance learning —compared to what? Journal of
Applied Research in Memory and Cognition, 1,2 5 7–259.
*Kromann, C. B., Jensen, M. L., & Ringsted, C. (2009). The effect of testing on skills learning. Medical
Education, 43, 21–27.
*Kromann, C. B., Bohnstedt, C., Jensen, M. L., & Ringsted, C. (2010). The testing effect on skills learning might
last 6 months. Advances in Health Sciences Education, 15, 395 –401.
*Kromann, C. B., Jensen, M. L., & Ringsted, C. (2011). Test-enhanced learning may be a gender-related
phenomenon explained by changes in cortisol level. Medical Education, 45, 192–199.
Kulik, J. A., & Kulik, C. C. (1988). Timing of feedback and verbal learning. Review of Educational Research,
58, 79–97.
Lakens, D., Hilgard, J., & Staaks, J. (2016). On the reproducibility of meta-analyses: six practical recommen-
dations. BMC Psychology, 4(1), 24.
Lan, X., Legare, C. H., Ponitz, C. C., Li, S., & Morrison, F. J. (2011). Investigating the links between the
subcomponents of executive function and academic achievement: a cross-cultural analysis of Chinese and
American preschoolers. Journal of Experimental Child Psychology, 108(3), 677–692.
*Larsen, D. P., Butler, A. C., & Roediger, H. L. (2009). Repeated testing improves long-term retention relative to
repeated study: a randomised controlled trial. Medical Education, 43, 12 1174 –1181.
*Larsen, D. P., Butler, A. C., & Roediger, H. L. (2013a). Comparative effects of test-enhanced learning and self-
explanation on long-term retention. Medical Education, 47, 7 674–682.
*Larsen, D. P., Butler, A. C., Lawson, A. L., & Roediger, H. L. (2013b). The importance of seeing the patient:
test-enhanced learning with standardized patients and written tests improves clinical application of knowl-
edge. Advances in Health Sciences Education, 18, 3, 409 –425.
*Leeming, F. C. (2002). The exam-a-day procedure improves performance in psychology classes. Teaching of
Psychology, 29, 3, 210–212.
Lipko-Speed, A., Dunlosky, J., & Rawson, K. A. (2014). Does testing with feedback help grade-school children
learn key concepts in science? Journal of Applied Research in Memory and Cognition, 3 (3), 171–176.
*Lyle, K. B., & Crawford, N. A. (2011). Retrieving essential material at the end of lectures improves
performance on statistics exams. Teaching of Psychology, 38, 2 94 –97.
Markus, H. R., & Kitayama, S. (1991). Culture and the self: implications for cognition, emotion, and motivation.
Psychological Review, 98(2), 224–
253.
*McDaniel, M. A., Agarwal, P. K., Huelser, B. J., McDermott, K. B., & Roediger, H. L. (2011). Test-enhanced
learning in a middle school science classroom: the effects of quiz frequency and placement. Journal of
Educational Psychology, 103, 2, 399-414.
*McDaniel, M. A., Thomas, R. C., Agarwal, P. K., McDermott, K. B., & Roediger, H. L. (2013). Quizzing in
middle-school science: successful transfer performance on classroom exams. Applied Cognitive Psychology,
27, 3 360 –372.
*McDermott, K. B., Agarwal, P. K., D’Antonio, L., Roediger, H. L., & McDaniel, M. A. (2014). Both multiple-
choice and short-answer quizzes enhance later exam performance in middle and high school classes. Journal
of Experimental Psychology: Applied, 20, 3–21.
McLaughlin, K., & Coderre, S. (2015). The potential and conditional benefits of retrieval practice on learning.
Advances in Health Sciences Education, 20(2), 321–324.
McShane, B. B., & Böckenholdt, U. (2020). Enriching meta-analytic models of summary data: a thought
experiment and case study. Advances in Methods and Practices in Psychological Science, 3(1), 81–93.
Educational Psychology Review

Metcalfe, J., Kornell, N., & Finn, B. (2009). Delayed versus immediate feedback in children ’s and adults ’
vocabulary learning. Memory & Cognition, 37(8), 1077–1087.
*Michaels, J. L. (2017). Quizzes benefit freshman and sophomore students more than junior and senior students
in introductory psychology classes with noncumulative exams. Scholarship of Teaching and Learning in
Psychology, 3, 4, 272–283.
Minear, M., Coane, J. H., Boland, S. C., Cooney, L. H., & Albat, M. (2018). The benefits of retrieval practice
depend on item difficulty and intelligence. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 44, 1474–1486.
Moreira, B. F. T., Pinto, T. S. S., Starling, D. S. V., & Jaeger, A. (2019). Retrieval practice in classroom settings:
a review of applied research. Frontiers in Psychology, 4,1 –16.
Morris, C. D., Bransford, J. D., & Franks, J. J. (1977). Levels of processing versus transfer-appropriate
processing. Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 16 (5), 519–533.
Mullet, H. G., Butler, A. C., Verdin, B., von Borries, R., & Marsh, E. J. (2014). Delaying feedback promotes
transfer of knowledge despite student preferences to receive feedback immediately. Journal of Applied
Research in Memory and Cognition, 3(3), 222–229.
Myers, G. C. (1914). Recall in relation to retention. Journal of Educational Psychology, 5(3), 119–130.
*Narloch, R., Garbin, C. P., & Turnage, K. D. (2006). Benefits of prelecture quizzes. Teaching of Psychology,
33, 2 109 –112.
Nguyen, K., & McDaniel, M. A. (2015). Using quizzing to assist student learning in the classroom: the good, the
bad, and the ugly. Teaching of Psychology, 42(1), 87–92.
Niedermeyer, F. C., & Sullivan, H. J. (1972). Differential effects of individual and group testing strategies in an
objectives-based instructional program.Journal of Educational Measurement, 9(3), 199–204.
Nunes, L. D., & Karpicke, J. D. (2015). Retrieval-based learning: research at the interface between cognitive
science and education. In R. A. Scott & S. M. Kosslyn (Eds.), Emerging trends in the social and behavioral
sciences (pp. 1–16). Inc: John Wiley & Sons.
O’Donnell, C. L. (2008). Defining, conceptualizing, and measuring fidelity of implementation and its relation-
ship to outcomes in K–12 curriculum intervention research.Review of Educational Research, 78(1), 33–84.
OECD (2020). Education at a glance: educational attainment and labour-force status.https://data.oecd.org/eduatt/
population-with-tertiary-education.htm
Open Science Framework. (2020). Center for Open Science. http://cos.io/osf
Pachai, A. A., Acai, A., LoGiudice, A. B., & Kim, J. A. (2016). The mind that wanders: challenges and potential
benefits of mind wandering in education. Scholarship of Teaching and Learning in Psychology, 2(2), 134–
146.
Pan. S. C., & Agarwal, P. K. (2020). Retrieval practice and transfer of learning: fostering students’ application
of knowledge. http://www.retrievalpractice.org
Pan, S. C., & Rickard, T. C. (2018). Transfer of test-enhanced learning: meta-analytic review and synthesis.
Psychonomic Bulletin, 144(7), 710–756.
Paradis, E., & Sutkin, G. (2017). Beyond a good story: from Hawthorne effect to reactivity in health professions
education research. Medical Education, 51(1), 31–39.
Pyc, M. A., Agarwal, P. K., & Roediger, H. L. (2014). Test-enhanced learning. Chapter in Benassi, V. A.
,Overson, C. E. & Hakala, C. M. (Eds.), Applying science of learning in education: Infusing psychological
science into the curriculum. APA Society for the Teaching of Psychology .
Racsmány, M., Szőllősi, A., & Bencze, D. (2018). Retrieval practice makes procedure from remembering: an
automatization account of the testing effect. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 44, 157–166.
Rad, M. S., Martingano, A. J., & Ginges, J. (2018). Toward a psychology of Homo sapiens: making psycho-
logical science more representative of the human population. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences, 115,1 1 4 0 1–11405.
Rawson, K. A., Dunlosky, J., & Sciartelli, S. M. (2013). The power of successive relearning: improving
performance on course exams and long-term retention. Educational Psychology Review, 25(4), 523–548.
Roediger, H. L., & Butler, A. C. (2011). The critical role of retrieval practice in long-term retention. Trends in
Cognitive Sciences, 15(1), 20–27.
Roediger, H. L., & Karpicke, J. D. (2006a). The power of testing memory: basic research and implications for
educational practice. Perspectives on Psychological Science, 1(3), 181–210.
Roediger, H. L., & Karpicke, J. D. (2006b). Test-enhanced learning: taking memory tests improves long-term
retention. Psychological Science, 17(3), 249–255.
*Roediger, H. L., Agarwal, P. K., McDaniel, M. A., & McDermott, K. B. (2011). Test-enhanced learning in the
classroom: long-term improvements from quizzing. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Applied, 17, 4
382–395.
Educational Psychology Review

Rohrer, D., Dedrick, R. F., Hartwig, M. K., & Cheung, C.-N. (2020). A randomized controlled trial of interleaved
mathematics practice. Journal of Educational Psychology, 112(1), 40–52.
Rowland, C. A. (2014). The effect of testing versus restudy on retention: a meta-analytic review of the testing
effect. Psychological Bulletin, 140(6), 1432–1463.
*Saville, B. K., Pope, D., Lovaas, P., & Williams, J. (2012). Interteaching and the testing effect: a systematic
replication. Teaching of Psychology, 39, 4, 280–283.
Schwieren, J., Barenberg, J., & Dutke, S. (2017). The testing effect in the psychology classroom: a meta-analytic
perspective. Psychology Learning and Teaching, 16(2), 179–196.
Segall, M. H., Campbell, D. T., & Herskovits, M. J. (1966). The influence of culture on visual perception .
Indianapolis: Bobbs-Merrill.
Sennhenn-Kirchner, S., Goerlich, Y., Kirchner, B., Notbohm, M., Schiekirka, S., Simmenroth, A., & Raupach, T.
(2016). The effect of repeated testing vs repeated practice on skills learning in undergraduate dental
education. European Journal of Dental Education, 22,e 4 2–e47.
*Shapiro, A. M., & Gordon, L. T. (2012). A controlled study of clicker-assisted memory enhancement in college
classrooms. Applied Cognitive Psychology, 26, 4, 635–643.
Simmons, J. P., Nelson, L. D., & Simonsohn, U. (2011). False-positive psychology: undisclosed flexibility in
data collection and analysis allows presenting anything as significant.Psychological Science, 22(11), 1359–
1366.
*Son, J. Y., & Rivas, M. J. (2016). Designing clicker questions to stimulate transfer. Scholarship of Teaching and
Learning in Psychology, 2, 3, 193 –207.
Sotola, L. K., & Crede, M. (2020). Regarding class quizzes: a meta-analytic synthesis of studies on the
relationship between frequent low-stakes testing and class performance. Educational Psychology Review.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10648-020-09563-9.
Spitzer, H. F. (1939). Studies in retention. Journal of Educational Psychology, 30(9), 641–656.
*Stenlund, T., Jönsson, F. U., & Jonsson, B. (2017). Group discussions and test-enhanced learning: individual
learning outcomes and personality characteristics. Educational Psychology, 37, 2, 145–156.
Tipton, E., Pustejovsky, J. E., & Ahmadi, H. (2019). Current practices in meta-regression in psychology,
education, and medicine. Research Synthesis Methods, 10(2), 180–194.
*Tu, Y. C., Lin, Y. J., Lee, J. W., & Fan, L. W. (2017). Effects of didactic instruction and test-enhanced learning
in a nursing review course. Journal of Nursing Education, 56, 11, 683 –687.
Tweed, R. G., & Lehman, D. R. (2002). Learning considered within a cultural context: confucian and Socratic
approaches. American Psychologist, 57(2), 89–99.
van Egmond, M. C., Kühnen, U., & Li, J. (2013). Mind and virtue: the meaning of learning, a matter of culture?
Learning, Culture and Social Interaction, 2(3), 208–216.
Viveiros, J., Sethares, K., & Shapiro, A. (2017). Repeated recall as an intervention to improve memory
performance in heart failure patients. European Journal of Cardiovascular Nursing, 16(8), 724–732.
Vojdanoska, M., Cranney, J., & Newell, B. R. (2010). The testing effect: the role of feedback and collaboration in
a tertiary classroom setting. Applied Cognitive Psychology, 24(8), 1183–1195.
Weinstein, Y., Nunes, L. K., & Karpicke, J. D. (2016). On the placement of practice questions during study.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Applied, 22(1), 72–84.
Weinstein, Y., Madan, C. R., & Sumeracki, M. A. (2018). Teaching the science of learning.Cognitive Research:
Principles and Implications, 3,2 .
Wiklund-Hörnqvist, C., Jonsson, B., & Nyberg, L. (2014). Strengthening concept learning by repeated testing.
Scandinavian Journal of Psychology, 55(1), 10–16.
Zotero. (2020). Corporation for Digital Scholarship. http://www.zotero.org
Publisher’sN o t e Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps
and institutional affiliations.
Affiliations
Pooja K. Agarwal 1 & Ludmila D. Nunes 2 & Janell R. Blunt 3
1 Berklee College of Music, Boston, MA, USA
2 Association for Psychological Science, West Lafayette, Washington, DC, USA
3 Anderson University, Anderson, IN, USA
Educational Psychology Review