J
E P
M
Journal of Education in Perioperative Medicine: Vol. XIX, Issue 4   1
The Journal of Education  
in Perioperative Medicine
Original Research
How to Write Well-Defined Learning Objectives
DEBNATH CHATTERJEE, MD, FAAP
JANET CORRAL, PHD
Introduction
An anesthesiologist starts his grand rounds 
presentation on the topic of malignant 
hyperthermia (MH) with the following 
learning objectives:
1. Understand the pathophysiology of MH.
2. Review the clinical presentation of MH.
3. Discuss the treatment of MH.
4. Become familiar with caffeine-halothane 
contracture testing for MH.
This list informs the attendees about the 
topics covered during the presentation. 
However, do they know what is expected of 
them when they apply this content in their 
own clinical practice?
We have all seen learning “objectives” 
mentioned, such as the ones above, at the 
beginning of a presentation or workshop. 
But is what we see actually a learning 
objective? Learning objectives are often 
confused with learning goals; the example 
above is such a case in point. Learning 
goals are related to—but different from—
learning objectives. A learning goal is a 
broad statement of an expected learning 
outcome of a course or curriculum. 
Learning goals provide a vision for the 
future and often summarize the intention 
or topic area of several related learning 
objectives. Learning objectives  are drawn 
from the learning goals. They are guiding 
statements for each learning encounter, and 
they connect intention with reality within 
the learning experience as well as to the 
assessment planned. In keeping with the 
Roman philosopher Lucius Seneca, who 
said, “If a man knows not to which port 
he sails, no wind is favorable, ” this review 
article describes the essential components 
of learning objectives and provides 
practical tips on writing well-defined 
learning objectives.
Defining “Learning 
Objective”
A learning objective is a description of 
what the learner must be able to do upon 
completion of an educational activity. A 
well-written learning objective outlines 
the knowledge, skills and/or attitude the 
learners will gain from the educational 
activity and does so in a measurable way.
An effective learning objective should 
include the following 5 elements: who, will 
do, how much or how well, of what, by 
when.1 The mnemonic SMART—Specific, 
Measurable, Attainable, Relevant, and 
Time-bound—can be used to describe 
the elements of a well-written learning 
objective.2 One example of a SMART 
objective for an airway conference is: “Upon 
completion of the difficult airway workshop, 
participants should be able to formulate an 
accurate algorithm for the management 
of an obese adult patient with inadequate 
face mask ventilation, according to the 
American Society of Anesthesiologists 
difficult airway algorithm. ”
Practical tips for writing learning objectives 
are summarized in Table 1. Since the point 
of a learning objective is to describe the 
intended outcome for learning, begin the 
learning objective with: “Upon completion 
of this educational activity, learners 
should be able to . . . . ” The next step is to 
identify the concepts the learners need to 
learn and how they will demonstrate their 
understanding. It is recommended that the 
instructor choose one action verb that is 
measurable and observable. Verbs such as 
understand, know, learn, appreciate, believe, 
be familiar with, comprehend, and so on, are 
not observable or measurable and should 
be avoided. Each learning objective must 
be separate; two actions (such as diagnosis  
and management) or topics (such as 
bronchospasm and hypotension ) must not 
be combined. It is also important that the 
action verb identify the level and cognitive 
domain at which the learner is expected 
to perform. Bloom’s Taxonomy connects 
the depth of learning with action verbs 
that may be used when writing learning 
objectives.
Blooms’ Taxonomy and 
Action Verbs
When writing learning objectives, 
educators leverage Bloom’s Taxonomy 3 
(Table 2). Bloom’s Taxonomy describes 6 
levels of hierarchy in the cognitive domain: 
knowledge, comprehension, application, 
analysis, synthesis, and evaluation. This 
taxonomy was revised in 2001 4 (Figure 
1). Each level of the hierarchy correlates 
to action verbs that educators use within 
learning objectives. To help anesthesia 
educators apply Bloom’s Taxonomy more 
readily to their own learning, we will briefly 
review what each level of the hierarchy 
means to learning.
Knowledge “involves the recall of specifics 
and universals, the recall of methods and 
processes, or the recall of a pattern, structure, 
or setting. ” 3 This category appreciates 
and distinguishes factual knowledge, 
conceptual knowledge, procedural 
continued on next page

Journal of Education in Perioperative Medicine: Vol. XIX, Issue 4   2
knowledge, and metacognitive knowledge 
as separate elements of “knowledge. ” In 
anesthesia teaching, we frequently use the 
first 3 types. For example, we provide factual 
knowledge (eg, lecture to undergraduate 
medical learners), procedural knowledge  
(eg, teaching in simulation or during an 
operation), and conceptual knowledge  
(eg, case-based learning, principles of 
anesthesia). Metacognitive knowledge is 
often applicable when giving feedback 
to learners; for example, when helping 
learners understand their competency in 
communication with patients and families.
Comprehension “refers to a type of 
understanding or apprehension such 
that the individual knows what is being 
communicated and can make use of the 
material or idea being communicated 
without necessarily relating it to other 
material or seeing its fullest implications. ”3 
Application refers to the “use of abstractions 
in particular and concrete situations. ” 3 
Analysis represents the “breakdown of 
a communication into its constituent 
elements or parts such that relative 
hierarchy of ideas is made clear and/or 
the relations between ideas expressed are 
made explicit. ”3 Synthesis involves “putting 
together of elements and parts so as to 
form a whole, ” 3 and evaluation includes 
“judgments about the value of material and 
methods for given purposes. ”3
All educators should make the important 
connection between the intended learning 
depth (eg, comprehension) and the action 
verbs that reflect that intended learning 
outcome within the learning objective. 
Action verbs guide the learner about the 
intended outcome; for example, “critically 
appraise the evidence related to rapid 
sequence induction for airway management 
in pregnant patients. ”
Incorporating Bloom’s 
Taxonomy and SMART 
for Effective Learning 
Objectives
Both Bloom’s Taxonomy and SMART are 
necessary for writing effective learning 
objectives that communicate the intention 
for the learner with the intended learning 
outcomes. Examples of weak learning 
objectives and suggestions for better 
wording, based on incorporating Bloom’s 
Taxonomy and SMART, are listed in Table 
3.
When faculty are leading sessions on 
writing SMART objectives, the authors 
often hear participants challenge that 
SMART objectives are longer and very 
detailed—consequently, will learners even 
follow them? The counterargument is that 
any objective worded too broadly, with no 
measurable standard that is attainable and 
Original Research
continued from previous page
Table 2: Revised Bloom’s Taxonomy of Learning Objectives  
(Adapted from http://www.ucdenver.edu/academics/colleges/medicalschool/education/degree_programs/MDProgram/administration/curriculumoffice/Documents/CU-
SOM_Learning-Objectives-Guidelines.pdf)
Cognitive Domain Cognitive Process Action Verbs
Remember Retrieve relevant knowledge from long term memory
• Define
• Describe
• Identify
• Label
• List
• MatchName
• Outline
• Reproduce
• Select
• State
• Recall
• Record
• Recognize
• Repeat
• Draw on
• Recount
Understand Construct meaning from instructional messages, including 
oral, written and graphic communication
• Describe
• Estimate
• Explain
• Extend
• Generalize
• Summarize
• Clarify
• Express
• Review
• Discuss
• Locate
• Report
• Express
• Identify
• Illustrate
• Interpret
• Represent
• Differentiate
Apply Carry out or use a procedure in a given situation
• Apply
• Change
• Compute
• Calculate
• Demonstrate
• Discover
• Manipulate
• Modify
• Operate
• Predict
• Prepare
• Produce
• Relate
• Show
• Solve
• Use
• Schedule
• Employ
• Intervene
• Practice
• Illustrate
Analyze
Break material into its constituent parts and determine how 
the parts relate to one another and to an overall structure or 
purpose
• Analyze
• Diagram
• Classify
• Contrast
• Categorize
• Differentiate
• Discriminate
• Distinguish
• Inspect
• Illustrate
• Infer
• Relate
• Select
• Survey
• Calculate
• Debate
• Compare
• Criticize
Evaluate Make judgments based on criteria and standards
• Appraise
• Argue
• Compare
• Conclude
• Contrast
• Criticize
• Discriminate
• Judge
• Evaluate
• Revise
• Select
• Justify
• Critique
• Recommend
• Relate
• Value
• Validate
• Summarize
Create Put elements together to form a coherent or functional 
whole: reorganize elements into a new pattern or structure
• Compose
• Design
• Plan
• Assemble
• Prepare
• Construct
• Propose
• Formulate
• Set up
• Invent
• Develop
• Devise
• Summarize
• Produce
continued on next page
Table 1: Practical tips for writing effective learning objectives.
• Each learning objective must answer the following 
questions: Who, will do, how much or how well, 
of what, by when?
• Identify content areas that the participants are 
expected to learn.
• Choose an action verb that is measurable 
and observable to specify the desired learner 
performance, followed by a description of the 
content.
• Use more complex or higher-order action verbs 
when appropriate.
• Avoid using action verbs such as “understand, 
know, learn, appreciate, believe, be familiar with, 
comprehend, ” etc.
• Each learning objective must be separate: 
Two separate actions (such as diagnosis and 
management) or topics (such as bronchospasm 
and hypotension) must not be combined.
• Specify the condition in which the action will 
occur. An example of a good way to begin the 
statement is: “Upon completion of this learning 
activity, participants should be able to . . . . ”
• SMART learning objectives are:
Specific: What action will be performed and by 
whom?
Measurable: How will success be measured? 
Objectives should quantify the amount of 
change expected.
Achievable: Can this objective be achieved 
within a given time frame and with available 
resources?
Relevant: Are the objectives aligned with the 
instructional method and assessment?
Time-Bound: When will this objective be achieved? 
Objectives should provide a time frame indicating 
when the objective will be met.

Journal of Education in Perioperative Medicine: Vol. XIX, Issue 4   3
repeatable for the learner in the given time 
frame, leads to confusion about “what to 
study” or “what performance is expected. ” 
The value in writing SMART objectives 
includes helping educators focus and 
specify what they intend to teach, assess, 
and offer as feedback for the learner. This 
shapes the learning session’s scope, the 
method of instruction, and the type and 
quality of the assessment.
Do Learning Objectives Add 
V alue to Curriculum and 
Assessment?
For many, writing out the learning 
objectives appears to be an effort to its own 
end. However, learning objectives are the 
foundation for instructional alignment. 
Instructional alignment  means that 
learning objectives, assessment tools, and 
instructional methods mutually support 
the same educational outcome. 5 This is 
known as the Golden Triangle 5 (Figure 2). 
Well-defined learning objectives outline 
the desired outcome for learners, which 
will help specify the instructional method. 
For example, if we want the learners to 
demonstrate correct intubation procedure 
in a normal adult 100% of the time, we 
need the instructional method to involve 
some sort of hands-on experience so that 
learners can demonstrate their skills. In 
contrast, if the teacher lectures about 
correct intubation without the opportunity 
for learners to complete hands-on skills, 
the learning activity is not aligned with the 
stated learning objective.
Likewise, learning objectives guide the 
assessment method. Taking the above 
example: If the objective is for learners 
to be 100% successful in normal adult 
intubation, assessing their skill using a 
written exam would misalign the objective 
and assessment method. As educators, 
we would miss the accuracy of the skill! 
Instead, the assessment method needs 
hands-on performance.
Constructive alignment underscores what 
learning objectives contribute towards 
achieving the intended educational 
outcomes. Learning objectives also 
contribute to shaping expectations, 
preparing learners for the educational 
activity and the standard by which their 
performance will be measured; the 
objectives also define faculty and learner 
responsibilities towards achieving the 
intended learning outcomes. Learning 
objectives may also guide teaching, by 
defining and limiting content or activities.
Are SMART Learning 
Objectives a Required 
Component of Medical 
Education?
Learning objectives are a required 
component in the planning of all medical 
Original Research
continued from previous page
Figure 2: Instructional alignment of learning 
objectives, assessment and instructional methods.
continued on next page
Table 3. Examples of weak learning objectives and suggestions for SMARTer learning objectives. All of the 
learning objectives are written for an hour-long grand rounds presentation and begin with “Upon comple-
tion of the grand rounds presentation, participants should be able to:”
Weak learning objective SMARTer learning objective Explanation
Review the anesthetic consid-
erations in pediatric traumatic 
brain injury.
Formulate an anesthetic plan for a child presenting with abu-
sive head trauma that includes the following steps from the 
2012 guidelines for the acute medical management of severe 
traumatic brain injury in infants, children and adolescents 
with 80% accuracy: rapid sequence induction, in-line cervi-
cal stabilization for intubation, maintain normocarbia, avoid 
hyperthermia, avoid hypotension, treat seizures, monitor in-
tracranial pressure and treat intracranial hypertension.
Verbs such as review, understand, appreciate, 
learn or become familiar with are not measur-
able or observable and should be avoided.
Be aware of anesthetic consid-
erations with neurophysiologic 
monitoring in spine surgeries.
Accurately compare the effects of at least three intravenous 
anesthetic agents on the latency and amplitude of somato-
sensory and motor evoked potentials for neurophysiologic 
monitoring during posterior spinal fusion.
Even though the context is clearly stated, ‘be 
aware of ’ is not measurable or observable.
Even though the context is clearly stated, ‘be aware of ’ is not 
measurable or observable.
Discuss possible complications 
during open mid-gestation fetal 
surgeries.
Critically analyze the risk of preterm labor, preterm prema-
ture rupture of membranes and uterine dehiscence following 
open mid-gestation fetal myelomeningocele repair in the 
Management of Myelomeningocele Study.
Analyze is a higher order cognitive skill than 
discuss.
Describe the anesthetic impli-
cations of bronchopulmonary 
dysplasia in a former premature 
infant.
Perform a preoperative evaluation of a former premature 
infant with bronchopulmonary dysplasia who is scheduled 
for emergency inguinal hernia repair that includes a detailed 
history, lung auscultation, measuring baseline oxygen satura-
tion, administering preoperative bronchodilators and ruling 
out concurrent pneumonia, within 30 minutes.
Evaluate is a higher order cognitive skill than 
describe.
Figure 1: Original and revised versions of Bloom’s Taxonomy (Reprinted with permission from Wilson 
LO. http://thesecondprinciple.com)

Journal of Education in Perioperative Medicine: Vol. XIX, Issue 4   4
education curricula. At the undergraduate 
level, the Liaison Committee on Medical 
Education (LCME) requires that “the 
faculty of a medical school define its medical 
education program objectives in outcome-
based terms that allow the assessment of 
medical student’s progress in developing 
the competencies that the profession and 
the public expect of a physician. ” 6 At the 
graduate medical education level, one of 
the common program requirements from 
the Accreditation Council on Graduate 
Medical Education (ACGME) states that 
each program must distribute competency-
based goals and objectives for each 
assignment at every educational level.7 Even 
for continuing medical education (CME), 
both the American Medical Association 
(AMA) and Accreditation Council for 
Continuing Medical Education (ACCME) 
require that a CME activity has learning 
objectives to qualify for category 1 credit. 8 
Consequently, writing effective learning 
objectives is a core skill that every academic 
anesthesiologist should master.
Conclusion
Writing effective learning objectives is a 
necessary skill in academic medicine. Well-
defined learning objectives describe what 
the learner must be able to achieve upon 
completion of the educational activity. 
Bloom’s Taxonomy and SMART are two 
tools that educators may leverage towards 
writing learning objectives that effectively 
relate the intended outcomes to the learners, 
simultaneously setting up the educators to 
successfully attain the learning outcomes 
within the time and resources provided. 
The successful academic anesthesiologist 
can align the instructional method, 
assessment, and intended learning outcome 
by using SMART learning objectives rather 
than learning goals. In closing, we revisit 
the learning goals in the opening anecdote 
of this review article.
Upon completion of the grand rounds 
presentation, participants will be able to:
1. Describe at least 3 intracellular 
mechanisms within the muscle cells 
during an episode of malignant 
hyperthermia (MH). The description 
must include: unregulated calcium 
release from sarcoplasmic reticulum, 
sustained muscle contractures, and the 
resulting hypermetabolic response.
2. Relate the 4 most common clinical 
signs of MH (hypercarbia, tachycardia/
tachypnea, generalized muscle rigidity, 
and hyperthermia) to the underlying 
physiological mechanisms in the muscle 
cells.
3. Summarize, in order, the critical steps 
in the intraoperative management 
of an MH crisis according to 
recommendations from the Malignant 
Hyperthermia Association of the 
United States.
4. Formulate an anesthetic plan for 
management of a MH-susceptible 
patient that must include the use of: non-
triggering anesthetic agents, monitoring 
for signs of MH, and preparedness to 
treat acute MH.
5. Critically appraise the role of caffeine-
halothane testing for MH including 
indications, location, sensitivity, and 
specificity.
References
1. Thomas PA. Goals and objectives, In: Thomas 
PA, Kern DE, Hughes MT and Chen BY (Eds.). 
Curriculum Development for Medical Education: A 
Six Step Approach, 3rd ed. Baltimore, MD: Johns 
Hopkins University Press 2016;50-64.
2. Skrbic N, Burrows J. Specifying Learning 
Objectives, In: Ashmore L, Robinson D (Eds.). 
Learning, Teaching and Development: Strategies 
for Action. London: Sage Publications 2014;54-87.
3. Bloom BS. Taxonomy of Educational Objectives: 
Handbook I: Cognitive Domain. New Y ork: 
Longman 1984;201-7 [Appendix].
4. Anderson LW , Krathwohl DR. A Taxonomy for 
Learning, Teaching, and Assessing: A Revision of 
Bloom’s Taxonomy of Educational Objectives. New 
Y ork: Addison Wesley Longman 2001.
5. Cohen SA. Instructional alignment: Searching for 
a magic bullet. Educ Res. 1987;16(8):16-20.
6. Liaison Committee on Medical Education 
Standards for Accreditation of Medical Education 
Programs Leading to the MD Degree. http://www.
lcme.org/publications/#Standards. Published 
March 2016. Accessed May 10, 2017.
7. Accreditation Council for Graduate Medical 
Education Common Program Requirements. 
http://www.acgme.org/Portals/0/PFAssets/
ProgramRequirements/CPRs_07012016.pdf. 
Published February 11, 2007. Accessed May 10, 
2017.
8. American Medical Association Guidance on 
New Procedure for CME. www.ama-assn.org/
ama/pub/education-careers/continuing-medical-
education/physicians-recognition-award-credit-
system/cme-help/guidance-new-procedure-cme.
page. Accessed May 10, 2017.
Original Research
continued from previous page
The authors are at the University of Colorado School of Medicine in Aurora, 
Colorado. Debnath Chatterjee is Assistant Professor, Department of Anesthesiology, 
Children’s Hospital Colorado; Janet Corral is in the Department of Internal Medicine.
Corresponding Author: Debnath Chatterjee, MD, FAAP , Associate Professor, 
Department of Anesthesiology, Children’s Hospital Colorado, University of Colorado 
School of Medicine, 13123 East 16th Ave, B090, Aurora, CO, 80045. Telephone 
(720) 777-4825, Fax: (720) 777-7266. Email address: debnath.chatterjee@
childrenscolorado.org
rrh: Learning Objectives  Financial Disclosures: None. 
Conflicts of Interest: None.
Author Contributions: Debnath Chatterjee, MD, wrote the manuscript and 
reviewed the final draft before submission. Janet Corral, PhD, reviewed the initial 
and final draft and contributed to the content.
Abstract: Writing effective learning objectives is a necessary skill in academic 
medicine. Learning objectives are clearly written, specific statements of observable 
learner behavior or action that can be measured upon completion of an 
educational activity. They are the foundation for instructional alignment whereby 
the learning objectives, assessment tools, and instructional methods mutually 
support the desired learning outcome. This review article describes the essential 
components of a learning objective and provides practical tips on writing well-
defined learning objectives.
Key Words: learning objectives; goals; Bloom’s Taxonomy