BOARD of GOVERNORS in supersession of 
Medical Council of India 
Enumerate
DemonstrateObserve
Assist  
Describe
Analyse
Interpret
Communicate      Guide
Counsel
KnowledgeKnowledge SkillsSkills AttitudeAttitude ValuesValues ResponsivenessResponsiveness CommunicationCommunication
COMPETENCY BASED UNDERGRADUATE CURRICULUM  
FOR THE INDIAN MEDICAL GRADUATE
Knows    Knows how       Shows           Shows how        Performs   
Curriculum Implementation Support Program 
Clinician                   Team LeaderCommunicator      
Integrate      
Professional Lifelong Learner
Collaborate      
Prescribe      
Correlate
Critique
Foundation Course
Module 1

Foundation Course for the Undergraduate 
Medical Education Program 
 
2019 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Medical Council of India 
Pocket-14, Sector-8, Dwarka, 
New Delhi 110 077

All rights reserved. No pa rt of this publication/document  may be reproduced, 
distributed, or transmitted in any form or by any means, including photocopying, 
recording, or other electronic or mechanical methods, without the prior written 
permission from Medical Council of India, except for use in Curriculum Impl ementation 
Support Program by medical teachers and institutions as well as in the case of brief 
quotations embodied in critical reviews and certain other non -commercial uses 
permitted by copyright law 2019. 
 
How to Cite: Medical Council of India. Foundation Course for the Undergraduate 
Medical Education Program, 2019: pp 1-46.

Written by Expert group with additional contributions from:  
 
1  Dr. John Stephen S 
Professor, Department of Dermatology & Medical Education 
Convener, MCI Nodal Centre for Faculty Development, 
St. John’s Medical College Hospital, Sarjapur Road, Bangalore-560034 
 
2.  Dr. Latha Ravichandran 
 Professor, Department of Paediatrics 
 Co-Convener, MCI Nodal Centre,  
 Sri Ramachandra Medical College and Research Institute, 
 Porur, Chennai – 600 116 
 
3.  Dr. Sanjiv Lalwani 
Professor, Department of Forensic Medicine 
Registrar, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, 
Ansari Nagar, New Delhi – 110029 
 
Expert Group  
1. Dr. Avinash Supe 
 Former Director (ME and MH) and Dean, Emeritus Professor,  
 Departments of G I Surgery and Medical Education  
 Seth GSMedical College and KEM Hospital, Mumbai – 400012 
 
2. Dr. Krishna G. Seshadri 
 Visiting Professor  
 Departments of Endocrinology, Diabetes and Medical Education 
      Member, Board of Management 
 Sri Balaji Vidyapeeth, Puducherry - 607 403 
 
3.  Dr. R. Sajith Kumar 
 Professor and Head, Departments of Infectious Disease and Medical Education 
 Convener, MCI Nodal Centre for Faculty Development 
 Government Medical College, Kottayam, Kerala – 686008 
 
4. Dr. P.V. Chalam 
 Principal and Professor, Department of Surgery 
 Bhaskar Medical College, RR Dist., Telangana – 500075 
 
5. Dr. Praveen Singh 
 Professor and Head, Departments of Anatomy and Medical Education 
 Convener, MCI Nodal Centre for Faculty Development 
 Pramukhswami Medical College, Karamsad, Gujarat - 388325 
 
6. Dr. Tejinder Singh      
 Professor, Department of Medical Education 
 Sri Guru Ram Das Institute of Medical Sciences and Research,  
Amritsar, Punjab – 143501.  
 
7.  Dr. P.V. Vijayaraghavan 
 Vice Chancellor and Professor of Orthopedics,  
 Convener, MCI Nodal Centre,Sri Ramachandra Medical College and Research Institute,  
 Porur, Chennai-600116.  
 
8. Dr. Subir K. Maulik 
 Professor, Department of Pharmacology 
 All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi-110029 
 
9.   Dr. M. Rajalakshmi, 
Chief Consultant, Academic Cell 
Medical Council of India, Pocket-14, Phase-1,Sector - 8,  Dwarka,  
New Delhi - 110077

Curriculum Implementation Support Program  
 
Module – 1  
 
 
 
FOUNDATION COURSE

FOUNDATION COURSE 
Objective of the document 
The objective of th is document is to facilitate institution s and faculty in implementing a 
Foundation Course of one-month duration at the beginning of the MBBS course that 
will sensitise the fresh medical student with the required knowledge and skills that will 
assist him/her in acclimatising to the new professional environment which would be 
his/her milieu for a life -long career in the medical profession .  The Foundation Course 
will also provide a sound foundation for learning in the MBBS course and later in their 
professional career. While the institutions are expected to abide by the general 
guidelines, local changes can be made depending on the context and requirements. 
 
1. Glossary of terms used in the document 
Orientation: Refers to the awareness created in new students with respect to place 
(learning environment and facility), time, teaching schedules and timetables, processes 
(Rules, Regulations, policies and procedures), personnel (faculty, staff, and mentors), 
patients and their relatives. 
Skills Module: Refers to basic skills that are considered important for all health care 
personnel who deal with patients and requires students to be trained in prior to entering 
patient care areas.  
Enhancement skills: Refers to those skills which are needed to enable students from 
diverse ba ckgrounds (including different B oards, language of instruction, culture and 
varied degrees of technological exposure) to appreciate and accommodate the 
similarities and differences in medical practice and to feel at par with each other. 
Sports and extra-curricular activities: Refers to sports and extra - curricular activities 
permitted within the time schedule. 
Professionalism and ethics : Professionalism defines a set of values  and behaviour 
that build the trust that a patient has in his/ her doctor. Ethics are principles that govern 
the behaviour of doctors. Professional competence, effective communication and 
ethics are the three founding principles of Professionalism.



2. Introduction 
Medical education in India requires training in a wide spectrum of domains that 
involves exposure to human interactions and interpersonal relationships in various 
settings including hospital, community, clinics etc. The training is intense and demands 
great commitment, resilience and lifelong learning. Students enter a new environment 
in medical college at around 17 years  of age  directly from school which can be 
challenging. Therefore , it is desirable to create a period of acclimatisation and 
familiarization to the new environment. This would include an introduction to the course 
structure, learning methods, technology usage, and peer interactions which would 
facilitate their smooth transition from high school to medical college.  
This is proposed to be achieved through a  dedicated one month  exclusive 
“Foundation Course”, at the beginning of the MBBS course , to orient and sensitize the 
student to the various identified areas. M any of these identified areas will need to be 
followed up by more focused outcome-based sessions at various stages in the MBBS 
course. This will be achieved through activities/small courses integrated throughout the 
course which will be like the thread run ning through a garland. At appropriate stages 
throughout the course, emphasis will be laid on the various essential roles of the 
“Indian Medical Graduate”. 
 
3. Purpose 
The purpose of the Foundation Course include: 
a) Orienting the students to all aspects of the medical college environment.  
b) Equipping them with certain basic , but important, skills required for patient care 
and enhancing their communication, language, computer and learning skills.  
c) Providing opportunity for peer and faculty interactions and an overall 
sensitisation to the various learning methodologies.

4. Context from proposed GMER 2019 (Graduate Medical Education 
Regulations)   
9.1. Foundation Course 
Goal: The goal of the Foundation Course is to prepare a learner to study Medicine 
effectively. It will be of one-month duration after admission (see Table 1). 
9.1.1 Objectives: The objectives are to: 
(i) Orient the learner to: 
a. The medical profession and the physician’s role in society 
b. The MBBS programme 
c. Alternate health systems in the country and history of medicine 
d. Medical ethics, attitudes and professionalism 
e. Health care system and its delivery 
f. National health priorities and policies 
g. Universal precautions and vaccinations 
h. Patient safety and biohazard safety 
i. Principles of primary care (general and community-based care) 
j. The academic ambience 
(ii) Enable the learner to acquire enhanced skills in: 
a. Language 
b. Interpersonal relationships 
c. Communication 
d. Learning including self-directed learning 
e. Time management 
f. Stress management 
g. Use of information technology 
(iii) Train the learner to provide: 
a. First-aid 
b. Basic life support 
9.1.2  In addition to the above, learners may be enrolled in one of the following 
programmes which will be run concurrently: 
(i) Local language programme 
(ii) English language programme

(iii) Computer skills 
These may be done in the last hours of the day for the duration of the Foundation 
Course. 
9.1.3 These sessions must be as interactive as possible.

5. Major Components 
The major components of the Foundation Course include: 
 Orientation Program:  This includes orienting students  to all the components 
mentioned in GMER 9.1 and should be completed as one block in the first week. 
 Skills Module (Basic): This involves skill sessions such as Basic Life Support, First 
Aid, Universal precautions and biomedical waste and safety  management that 
students need to be trained prior to entering the patient care areas.  
 Field visit to Community and Primary Health Centre: These visits provide 
orientation to the care delivery through community and primary health centres, and 
include interaction with health care workers, patients and their families. 
 Professional development including Ethics:  This is an introduction to the  
concept of Professionalism and E thics. This component will provide students with 
understanding that clinical competence, communication skills and sound ethical 
principles are the foundation of professionalism. It will also provide understanding of 
the consequences of unethical and unprofessio nal behaviour, value of honesty, 
integrity and respect in all interactions. Professional attributes such as 
accountability, altruism, pursuit of excellence, empathy, compassion and humanism 
will be  addressed. It should inculcate respect and sensitivity for gender , 
background, culture, regional and language diversities. It should also include 
respect towards the differently abled persons. It introduces the students to the basic 
concept of compassionate care and functioning as a part of a healt h care team . It 
sensitises students to “learning” as a behaviour and to the appropriate methods of 
learning. 
 
Orientation to Professionalism and Ethics  will continue as the AETCOM module after 
the first month of the MBBS course and throughout the first year, with reinforcement of 
the various components introduced. 
 Sports and Extracurricular activities:  These have been included , in order to 
demonstrate the i mportance of work -life balance in a demanding profession, and 
provide an opportunity for students to have compulsory physical activity and to 
showcase their talents.  The Foundation Course should have compulsory 4 hours

per week for sports and 2 hours per week for extracurr icular activities, adding up to 
22 hours. 
 Enhancement of Language / Computer skills / Learning Skills: These are 
sessions to provide opportunity for the students from diverse background and 
language competence to undergo training for speaking and writing English, fluency 
in local language and basic computer skills. The students should be sensitized to 
various learning methodologies such as small group discussions, skills lab, 
simulations, documentation and concept of Self-Directed learning. 
Structure of the program for students 
Table.1 
1. Orientation course will be completed as single block in first week and will contain 
elements outlined in the section 9.1.1of the GMR 
2. Skills modules will contain elements outlined in the section 9.1.1 of the GMR 
3. Based on perceived needs the  students may choose  any or both of  language 
enhancements (English or local spoken or both) and computer skills. This should 
be available longitudinally throughout the duration of the Foundation Course and 
afterwards.  
Foundation Course will be organized by co-ordinator appointed by Dean of the 
college and will be under supervision by the heads of preclinical departments. 
Subjects/ Contents Total Teaching hours 
Orientation1 30 
Skills Module 2 35 
Field visit to Community Health Centre 8 
Professional Development including ethics 40 
Sports and Extracurricular activities 22 
Enhancement of language/ computer skills3 40 
Total teaching hours 175

Foundation Course Modules   
    
1.      Orientation Module Total  hours: 30 
 1A. Orientation Module: Introduction to institution / campus / facilities   
 1B. Orientation Module: Role of doctors in the society   
 1C. Orientation Module: History of Medicine and alternate systems   
 
1D. Orientation Module: IMG roles / overview MBBS curriculum 
various career pathways     
 1E. Orientation Module : Principles of family practice   
2.      Skills Module:  Total  hours: 35 
 2A.Skills Module: First Aid   
 2B.Skills Module: BLS   
 2C.Skills Module: Universal precautions   
 2D.Skills Module: Waste management   
 2E.Skills Module: Immunization   
 2F.Skills Module: Documentation     
3.      Community orientation module  Total  hours: 8 
 
3A. Community Orientation Module: National Health goals and policies/ health 
Care systems/ community health  
 
3B. Community Orientation Module: Interactions with patients and 
families, Communities.   
4.      Professional Development and Ethics Module (P&E) Total  hours: 40 
 4A. (P&E): Concept of Professionalism and Ethics   
 4B. (P&E): White coat Ceremony   
 4C. (P&E): Professional behaviour and altruistic behaviour   
 4D. (P&E): Working in a health care team   
 4E. (P&E): Disability competencies     
 4F. (P&E): Cultural competence   
 4G. (P&E): Stress management    
 4H. (P&E): Time management   
 4I. (P&E): Interpersonal relationship   
 4J. (P&E): Learning   
5.      Enhancement of Language and Computer Skills Module  Total  hours:40 
 
5A.Enhancement of Language and Computer Skills Module: 
Communication    
 
5B.Enhancement of Language and Computer Skills Module: Local 
Language training    
 
5C. Enhancement of Language and Computer Skills Module: English 
Language training    
 
5D.Enhancement of Language and Computer Skills Module: 
Computer Skills training     
6.      Sports and extracurricular activities:  Total  hours: 22 
    
    
 Sports should be for a mandatory 4 hours per week and extra-curricular 
 activities 2 hours per week, subject to a total of 22 hours.

6. Learning outcomes 
Code COMPETENCY 
The student should be able to: 
Domain K/KH/
SH/P 
1. Topic : ORIENTATION    
FC 1.1 Demonstrate understanding of the role of doctors in 
the society and their impact  
A KH 
FC 1.2 Demonstrate understanding of the Roles of an Indian 
Medical Graduate and relate it to the societal impact  
A KH 
FC 1.3 Discuss and appreciate the expectations of the 
students from the Nation, society, Institution, peers, 
colleagues and patients and vice versa  
A KH 
FC 1.4 Demonstrate understanding of the rules and 
regulations of the institution  
A SH 
FC 1.5 Orient themselves to the college campus, facilities, 
faculty, administrative structure , support systems  and 
processes of the institution  
A KH 
FC 1.6 
 
Discuss the various career pathways and 
opportunities for personal growth  
A KH 
FC 1.7 Demonstrate understanding of the overview of MBBS 
curriculum, its structure and outcomes and its relation 
to the career pathways  
K KH 
FC 1.8 Demonstrate understanding  the role of physician at 
various levels of Health care delivery   
K KH 
FC 1.9 Discuss the principles of family practice K KH 
FC 1.10 Demonstrate awareness of the History of Medicine 
and alternate systems of Medicine 
K K 
2 Topic : Skills    
FC 2.1 Perform Basic Life support in Skills lab S SH 
FC 2.2 Perform First Aid in a simulated environment S SH 
FC 2.3 Follow  bio-safety and universal precautions  S SH 
FC 2.4 Demonstrate handling and safe disposal of 
Biohazardous materials in a simulated environment  
S SH 
FC 2.5 Demonstrate proper hand washing and use of 
personal protective equipment  
S SH

FC 2.6 Demonstrate appropriate response to needle stick 
injuries  
S SH 
FC 2.7 Demonstrate Biomedical Waste segregation  (BMW), 
observe and explain the process of  management of 
BMW in accordance with National Regulations 
S SH 
FC 2.8 Discuss  the Immunization requirements of Health 
care professionals  
K KH 
FC 2.9 Demonstrate awareness of  significance of 
documentation in patient care and the proper method 
of documentation  
S SH 
3 Community Orientation and field visits    
FC 3.1 Demonstrate understanding of the  National Health 
Goals and Policies  
K KH 
FC 3.2 Discuss the national health scenario, demographic, 
socio-cultural and  epidemiological issues  
K KH 
FC 3.3 Demonstrate understanding of  the health care 
systems in India with reference to primary, secondary 
and tertiary level care  
K KH 
FC 3.4 Discuss the basic principles of community health and 
its impact on health and disease 
S SH 
FC 3.5 Demonstrate understanding of t he structure and 
functioning of the community health center  
K KH 
FC 3.6 Demonstrate ability to obtain patient experiences 
through patient and family interactions and relate 
these experiences to impact of environment and 
diseases. 
S SH 
4 Professional Development including Ethics    
FC 4.1  Demonstrate understanding of the concept of 
Professionalism and  ethics among health care 
professionals and discuss the consequences of 
unprofessional and unethical behavior  
S KH 
FC 4.2  Demonstrate understanding that compassion, 
altruism, integrity, duty, responsibility and trust are the 
core values that defines the nature of the physician’s 
work  
K KH 
FC 4.3  Discuss the value, honesty and respect during 
interaction with peers, seniors,  faculty, other health 
care workers and patients 
S KH

FC 4.4  Discuss the significance of working in a health care 
team  
S KH 
FC 4.5 Discuss disability competencies  K KH 
FC 4.6 Demonstrate understanding and respect of cultural 
diversities and interact with those with different 
cultural values 
K/A KH 
FC 4.7 Discuss the significance and methods of stress 
management and risk taking behavior.  
K KH 
FC 4.8 Understand the role of Yoga and meditation in 
personal health 
S S 
FC 4.9 Discuss the significance and appropriate ways  of 
Time management  
K KH 
FC 4.10 Demonstrate understanding of importance of 
interpersonal relationship while working in a health 
care team  
S KH 
FC 4.11 Understand the role of mentoring  S KH 
FC 4.12 Demonstrates understanding of the process of group 
learning and group dynamics  
S KH 
FC 4.13 Comprehend  the learning pedagogy and its role in 
learning skills  
S KH 
FC 4.14 Demonstrates understanding of different methods of 
self-directed learning  
S KH 
FC 4.15 Understand collaborative learning S KH 
5 Enhancement skills - Communication and 
language skills 
  
FC 5.1  Demonstrate ability to communicate with patient and 
families, be aware of barriers to communication and  
appropriate ways to respond 
C SH 
FC 5.2 Demonstrate use of  local language in patient and 
peer interactions  
C SH 
FC 5.3 Demonstrate ability to communicate  and learn in 
English  
C SH 
FC 5.4 Demonstrate basic computer skills  S SH 
FC 5.5 Demonstrate ability for accessing online resources  S SH

7. Formative and Internal Assessment 
 Foundation Course is compulsory and an attendance of 75% will be mandatory 
 Feedback, comments and/or grades about the student’s performance by the 
faculty mentor can be documented particularly for the skills training 
 The performance of the students in the Foundation Course will NOT contribute 
towards internal assessment marks. 
 Student’s feedback about the Foundation Course also needs to be documented 
in a st ructured format. This will help in gathering student’s perceptions about 
various aspects of Foundation Course and help in program evaluation  and 
refinement. 
8. Capacity Building for Faculty 
The components of the Foundation Course are multifarious and will req uire resource 
faculty from various disciplines. Many of these identified areas of the Foundation 
Course will need to be followed up by more focused outcome -based sessions at 
various stages in the course of MBBS through activities spirally integrated throughout 
the course. The objective s of each of the sessions in the Foundation Course are 
specific and the resource faculty need to understand not only the content, context and 
specific objectives of these sessions but also the approach and nee d for an interactive 
teaching learning methodology.  The Dean/Principal of every medical college will 
ensure that adequate faculty training and resources are made available for 
implementation of the Foundation Course.  
 
9. Curricular Governance and Evaluation  
The Dean/ Principal in each medical college will identify a faculty coordinator from 
preclinical departments for conduct of the Foundation Course.  
The faculty coordinator will identify resource faculty for the various sessions from within 
and outside the institution and coordinate the training of the resource faculty, the 
implementation of the program and the evaluation of the program.  
Program evaluation report from faculty and students  will be submitted to curriculum 
committee within four weeks of completion of Foundation Course.

Annexures 
 (The following are examples of schedules and lesson plans that may be used for Foundation Course. Institutions are encourage d 
to make their own plan tailored to their local needs and aligned to proposed outcomes) 
    Mon Tue Wed Thu Fri Sat Sun 
Week 1 
Morning 1A 1B 1C 1D 1E 2F 
  
  
  
  
             
  
  
  
  
After noon 1A 1B 1C 1D 1E   
  
6A 6A 6A 6A            
Week 2 
Morning 2B 2A 2C 2D 2E 
  6B 
  
  
  
  
          
 
  
After noon 2B 2A 2C 2D 2E   
  
6A 6A 6A 6A            
Week 3 
Morning 3A 4A 4C 4D 4G 
4F   
  
6B   
  
           
 
  
After noon 3B 4A 4C 4D 4E   
  
6A 6A 6A 6A            
Week 4 
Morning 4H 4J 5A 5D 5D 
5B   
  
6B   
  
           
 
  
After noon 4I 5B 5B 5B 5B   
  
6A 6A 6A 6A   
          
       Week 5 
Morning 5D 5C 5C 
    
 
After noon 5B 5C 4B

Sample lesson plans

1. Orientation 
The purpose of the Orientation Module is to provide the new MBBS student a greater understanding of the medical profession in a 
historical, local and national context, a knowledge of the institution in which he/she will spend th e next six years, and an idea of 
his/her role as an MBBS student. 
1A Orientation Module: Introduction to institution / campus / facilities 
The medical students at the very beginning of their course should have a clear understanding of the goals of their training, the 
expectations of the nation, the vision a nd mission of the institution, R ules and Regulations of the organisation. They must also 
be provided an orientation to the campus and the facilities available. 
FC 1.2 Demonstrate understanding of the Roles of an Indian Medical Graduate and relate it to 
the societal impact  
A KH 
FC 1.3 Discuss and appreciate the expectations of the students from the nation, society, 
Institution, peers, colleagues and patients and vice versa  
A KH 
FC 1.4 Demonstrate understanding of the rules and regulations of the institution  A SH 
FC 1.5 Orient themselves to the college campus, facilities, faculty, administrative structure , 
support systems and processes of the institution  
A KH 
Objectives:  
At the end of the session the students should be able to: 
 Explain the Roles of the Indian Medical Graduate  
 Discuss their expectations from the Nation, institution, society, colleagues and peers and vice versa  
 Understand the Rules and Regulations of the Institution

 Familiarise themselves with the college campus,  facilities, administrative structure, support systems and processes of the 
institution 
Methodology 
No. Content area Methodology Time 
1 Welcome and Introduction by institutional 
heads  
Inspiring talk… to the new MBBS graduates and their 
parents 
 
2 hours 
2 Vision / Mission of the institution 
3 Roles of an Indian Medical Graduate 
4 Expectation of the students from Nation, 
Society, Institutions, colleagues and  peers  
Overview lecture/ interactive discussion 
 
1 hour 
4 Rules and Regulations of the institution  Overview lecture/ interactive discussion 1 hour 
5 Orientation to the college / campus / 
facilities 
 Walk through the college including lecture halls, 
common rooms, preclinical departments, office of 
the Dean and administration, library, food facilities, 
security facilities, auditorium – 
 mini talks at important facilities regarding Rules and 
Regulations 
4 hours 
6 Introduction to faculty / mentors Interactive session with faculty mentors and peers 2 hours 
Assessment: Open feedback at the end of the Foundation Course

1B. Orientation Module: Role of doctors in the society 
It is important for new entrants  to the new MBBS program  to have a clear understanding of the roles and responsibilities of a 
doctor in society and the expectations from society, patients and the profession. It is important to sensitise and inspire students 
to the wider roles of physicians in society beyond patient-doctor interaction. 
 
FC 1.1 Demonstrate understanding of the role of the doctors in the society and their impact  A KH 
 
Objectives: 
At the end of this session, the student will be able to: 
1. Appreciate the wider role of physicians in society beyond the physician – patient interaction 
2. Reflection their own potential roles in society 
At the end of this session, the moderators will be able to: 
1. Better understand the attitude of students who join the medical course regarding their perceptions o f the social role of 
physicians 
2. Review the session and make plans for: 
a. Further sessions 
b. The session next year

Methodology 
No Sub session Methods Requirements Time 
1 Introduction Moderators, observers and other participants  10 minutes 
2 Role of doctors 
buzz groups 
 Create  buzz groups of 10 students each 
 Ask each group to list,  discuss and note down 
on separate cards the various roles of doctors 
 After 10 minutes, ask one student from each 
batch to bring up their cards to put on four 
different posters which will be labelled at the 
back as – diagnostic role, treating role, 
physician-patient interactive roles, societal 
role. 
 The students will be blinded to labels at the 
back of poster. The moderator will help them 
separate and place their cards. 
 At the end, the entire group will view the 
posters – the moderator will turn the posters 
around to show the poster titles at the back 
The discussion that follows will be based on the 
10 cards per group i.e. 
150 cards 
 
Felt pens 
04 large black poster 
sheets 
A4 white paper – for 
notes and observations 
30 minutes

nature of responses: 
 Do the students see the doctor within a 
constrained role? 
 Is there a societal role for doctors in all 
conditions? – is there an even greater 
relevance in a diverse, unequal society like 
India 
 Is there a possibility that doctors remove 
themselves from society – us (ivory tower) 
AND them – the concept of isolationism and 
the ‘urban citadel’ 
3 Short film Short film: In  Silence – maternal mortality in 
India  
Discussion: 
 Is this a medical problem or are there wider 
problems? 
 If there are wider problems, what are they? 
 What can doctors do to address wider 
problems?  
 Do doctors have privileged roles in society 
LCD projector with 
adequate sound facilities 
 
 
30 minutes

that they can exploit for greater common 
good? 
4 Meet the doctor Meet the doctor: 
Three doctors with diverse backgrounds who 
have chosen wider roles in society: 
They introduce themselves and their work 
Interview them: 
 Why did they choose this option? 
 What were the choices that they had to 
make? 
 What challenges did they face? 
 What advice, if any, would they give to these 
students? 
 
Arrange chairs for visitors 
to face the students 
6o 
minutes 
5 Wrap up Wrap up: 
Each student gets one card. 
 Think of one social issue in your own local 
area. 
 What could you do to help address that issue? 
150 cards  
 
4 black poster sheets 
60 brief feedback 
questionnaires 
30 minutes

Students stick it on a poster entitled – 
 I AM PART OF SOCIETY – I CAN 
CONTRIBUTE TO IT 
 Time for entire batch to review what has been 
put up-  
 Which of the sessions did you like the most & 
why?

Alternative method  
No Sub Session Methods Requirements Time 
1 Introduction  An interactive lecture to discuss 
 the roles of a physician and the expectation from 
the patient, families and society. 
followed by small group discussion  
Videos / clippings relating to the roles of the doctor 
could also be used as a trigger for discussion   
LCD projector, audio 
output for video, 
Appropriate Video clips, 
Flip charts, Marker pens 
 
1 hour 
2 Shadowing the 
physician 
Students asked to shadow Physicians and  
 observe patient - physician interaction and their 
expectations from doctors  
 2 hours 
3 Reflection Small group discussion and reflection  2 hours 
4 Wrap up Summarize salient points  10 minutes 
 
Assessment: Formative: May be assessed by active discussion in the small group session or by Reflective writing in log book.

1C.Orientation Module: History of Medicine and alternate systems 
Students at the time of entry into MBBS must be introduced to the evolution of the system of medicine which they will be 
learning and appreciate the great men and women behind many of the seemingly mundane practices and c oncepts in modern 
medicine. The students should also be introduced to the alternative systems that are available and h ow they can impact patient 
preferences and choices. 
FC 1.10 Demonstrate awareness of the History of Medicine and alternate systems of Medicine K K 
 
Objectives  
At the end of the session, the students should be able to: 
1. Discuss the History of Medicine  
2. Distinguish Alternative Medicine, Complementary Medicine and Evidence based Medicine  
3. Discuss the various Alternative Medicine practices in India and its practice impact  
Methodology 
No Sub Session Methods Requirements Time 
1 Overview  lecture/ interactive discussion LCD projector, Flip 
charts, Marker pens 
30 minutes 
2 Group work Students, split into groups, are given a structured task on  
 obtaining information on one important aspect of the 
History of Medicine (example – evolution of the germ 
History of Medicine 
hand outs 
3 hours

theory of medicine, discovery of vaccines,…etc)  
Small group discussion and reflection  
Presentation by groups and discussion 
3 Alternate systems 
of Medicine 
lecture/ interactive discussion to address the following 
questions 
 What is Alternative Medicine? 
 What is Complementary Medicine? 
 What is Evidence Based Medicine? 
 What is the difference between Modern Medicine and 
Complementary and Alternative Medicine (CAM)? 
 What is the practice impact? 
LCD projector, Flip 
charts, Marker pens 
1 hour 
3 Wrap up Summation and learning points  10 minutes 
Assessment: General feedback about the usefulness of the session for future planning

1D. Orientation Module: IMG roles / overview of MBBS curriculum and various career pathways   
It is important for medical student s at entry to have an overview of the curricular frame work and the expected learning 
outcomes from them. It is very important for them to know their career path and the road ahead. 
 
FC 1.2 Demonstrate understanding of the Roles of an Indian Medical Graduat e and relate it to 
the societal impact  
A KH 
FC 1.7 Demonstrate understanding of the overview of MBBS curriculum, its structure and 
outcomes and its relation to the career pathways  
K KH 
FC 1.6  Discuss the various career pathways and opportunities for personal growth  A KH 
 
The objectives  
At the end of the session, the students should be able to: 
 Comprehend the overall Goal and outcomes of the MBBS program  
 Reflect on the various Roles of the Indian Medical Graduate 
 Discuss the structure of the MBBS program 
 Recognise the various career pathways that are available for their Career growth

Methodology 
No Sub Session Methods Requirements Time 
1 GMR 2019 Lecture/ interactive discussion about the salient features 
of the GMR 2019 
 Explain the MBBS curriculum, its structure,  outcomes 
and curricular requirements for course completion 
and program certification   
LCD projector, Flip 
charts, Marker pens 
GMR 2019 handouts 
1 hour 
2 Panel discussion  A panel of specialists and physicians from diverse 
career pathways  
 Discuss the opportunities for the students followed by 
a question answer session.  
This could be done by the Alumni from various career 
back grounds 
 2 hour 
3 Wrap up Summation and learning points  10 minutes 
Assessment: General feedback about the usefulness of the session for future planning

1E Orientation Module: Principles of family practice 
The students need to be provided a basic understanding of the concept of family practice and holisti c care. It is also import ant 
for the student to understand the role of the family practitioner in the health system, the role the y could play at the various levels 
of health care.  
FC1.8 Demonstrate understanding the role of physician at various levels of Health care 
delivery   
K KH 
FC 1.9 Discuss the principles of family practice K KH 
 
Objectives: 
At the end of this session, the student will be able to: 
1. Discuss the principles of family practice and holistic care 
2. Describe the role of the physician in  the health care system 
 
Methodology 
No Sub Session Methods Requirements Time 
1 Principles of family 
practice and holistic 
care 
 
Lecture/ interactive discussion about the ten 
principles of family practice: 
 Caring 
 Clinical Competence 
 Cost-effectiveness 
 Continuity of care 
 Comprehensive care 
 Common problems management expertise 
LCD projector, Flip 
charts, Marker pens 
Case vignette or a visit 
to a family practitioner   
1 hour

 Co-ordination of Care 
 Community based care and  research 
 Counselling and Communication skills 
 Continuing Medical Education (CME) 
Depending on available time the session may be 
preceded by either an appropriate case vignette or 
a visit to a family practitioner   
Assessment: Formative: Reflective writing  
 
2. Skills  
The fresh undergraduate student should be aware of some basic principles of Hospital safety  and trained in certain basic skills 
that are mandated before they enter patient care areas. These are a part of quality initiatives to e nsure patient and physici an 
safety.  
 
2A and 2B Skills module 1 and 2: BLS and First Aid 
New entrants into medical fraternity should have a basic understanding of resuscitation and first aid skills.  
 
The Basic Life Support (BLS):  CPR provider training is designed to provide the students with foundational knowledge and 
skills needed to perform cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) and other lifesaving skills. The  first-aid component of this course 
addresses additional circumstances and diseases that may require intervention and assistance before the patient is transferred 
to emergency medical services. 
FC 2.1 Perform Basic Life support in Skills lab  S SH 
FC 2.2 Perform First Aid in a simulated environment  S SH

Objectives: 
At the end of this session, the student will be able to: 
1. Perform adequate chest compressions, deliver adequate ventilations in adults and children and appropriately use of an 
Automated External Defibrillator (AED). 
2. Recognize and initiate first aid for several life threatening emergencies. 
 
150 students can be divided into two groups of 75 each. Each group should be engaged by facilitators for a three hour session 
inclusive of break and subsequently groups should be rotated.

Group 1: Basic Life Support 
No Sub Session Methods Requirements Time 
1 Introduction Introduction to Basic Life Support. Its importance and 
need. 
 15 minutes 
2 Demonstration with 
appropriate videos 
followed by Hands on 
training 
15 groups of 5 students each = 75 Total 
Demonstrate individual skills of basic life support followed 
by hands on practice of each skill and finally integration of 
all the skills in a patient scenario. 
 Introduce them to C-A-B algorithm 
 Recognition of cardiac and respiratory arrest 
 Pulse check 
 Chest compression 
 Delivering effective breaths 
 Use of an AED 
 Integration of all skill sets into a single scenario. 
These skills will be taught for both adults and children 
(including infants) 
Space/Area to 
accommodate 
75 students, 
Adult, child and 
infant Basic Life 
support 
mannequins. 
LCD projector 
with adequate 
sound facilities 
to show 
appropriate 
videos. 
2.5 hours (150 
minutes) 
3 Wrap up Feedback from students and guidance for future learning  15 minutes

Group 2: First Aid 
No Sub Session Methods Requirements Time 
1 Introduction Introduction to several life threatening emergencies, 
the importance of first aid and its benefits. 
 15 minutes 
2 Appropriate videos 
followed by discussion 
and hands on training 
when required. 
75 students: Table top discussion 
Initial videos to demonstrate emergency scenarios 
followed by appropriate first aid. 
 First Aid Basics (Approach) 
 Medical emergencies (Breathing problems, 
Choking, Allergic reactions) 
 Injury Emergencies (Bleeding, Bandaging, Burns, 
Electrical Injuries) 
 Environmental Emergencies (Bites and stings, 
heat cramps) 
Emphasis on Do’s and Don’ts in each category. 
Space/Area to 
accommodate75 
students, 
adult, child and infant 
Basic Life support 
mannequins. 
LCD projector with 
adequate sound 
facilities to show 
appropriate videos. 
2.5 hours (150 
minutes) 
3 Wrap up Feedback from students and guidance for future 
learning 
 
 
15 minutes 
Assessment: Assessment of skill performance as a part of the formative assessment

2C Skills Module: Universal Precautions (UP) 
FC 2.3 Follow biosafety and universal precautions  S SH 
FC 2.4 Demonstrate handling and safe disposal of Bio hazardous materials in a simulated 
environment  
S SH 
FC 2.5 Demonstrate proper hand washing and use of personal protective equipment  S SH 
FC 2.6 Demonstrate appropriate response to needle stick injuries  S SH 
Objectives: 
At the end of this session, the student will be able to: 
1. Define Universal Precautions 
2. List essential components of Universal Precautions 
3. List infective and non- infective body fluids 
4. Demonstrate correct techniques of Hand washing, gloving/degloving, disinfection, handling sharps, waste disposal

Methodology 
No Sub Session Methods Requirements Time 
1 Definition of Universal 
Precautions (UP) 
Interactive lecture about: 
 Definition of UP 
 Essential components of UP 
 Infective and non-infective body fluids (may use 
a drill to recap) 
LCD projector, Flip 
charts, Marker pens 
 
1 hour 
2 Interactive practical 
demonstration 
 
 Divide the students into groups of not more 
than 10 per group. 
There should be one faculty per group who will 
conduct an interactive practical demo about  
 Use of hand rub 
 Gloving and de-gloving  
The students will be then allowed to demonstrate 
the correct method and receive feedback 
 2 hour 
3 Wrap up Summation and learning points  10 minutes 
Assessment: Formative assessment, OSCE

2D Skills Module: Waste management 
FC 2.7 Demonstrate Biomedical W aste (BMW) segregation, observe and reflect on the 
process of  management of BMW in accordance with National regulation 
S SH 
 
Objectives: 
At the end of this session, the student will be able to: 
1. Define biomedical waste 
2. Explain the hazards of improper disposal of biomedical wastes 
3. Describe the different types of waste generated in a health care facility 
4. Explain how one should segregate waste 
5. Explain how one should dispose biomedical wastes 
6. Methodology 
No Sub session Methods Requirements Time 
1 Definition of BMW Interactive lecture about: 
 Definition of biomedical wastes 
 Different types of waste generated in a health 
care facility) 
 Segregation and disposal of waste 
LCD projector, Flip 
charts, Marker pens 
 
1 hour 
Assessment: Students may present a reflection of their observation, OSCE on BMW segregation

2E Skills Module: Immunization 
The students should be sensitised to the occupational exposure and the need for protection and safety. D uring this session, it’s 
important to review the immunisation status of the students and also ensure compliance to the requirements. 
FC 2.8 Discuss  the Immunization requirements of Health care professionals  K KH 
Objectives: 
At the end of this session, the student will be able to: 
1. List the vaccine-preventable diseases (VPD) 
2. Explain why vaccination is important for staff and students 
3. Describe the vaccination recommendation for health care personnel (Hepatitis B, Chicken pox etc.) 
Methodology 
No Sub Session Methods Requirements Time 
1 Vaccine-preventable 
diseases and 
recommendations for 
health care personnel 
Interactive lecture about: 
 What are vaccine -preventable diseases 
(VPD)? 
 Why is vaccination important for staff? 
 VPDs in healthcare 
 Recommendation for health care personnel 
(Hepatitis B, Chicken pox) 
LCD projector, Flip 
charts, Marker pens 
 
1 hour 
Assessment: Formative assessment, short notes, Viva in summative assessments

2F Skills Module: Documentation   
The students in the first year should be introduced to the importance of “Documentation” in patient care. They should learn the 
method of appropriate documentation and understand its significance in patient and employee safety.  
FC 2.9 Demonstrate awareness of significance of documentation in patient care and the proper 
method of documentation  
S SH 
 
Objectives  
At the end of the session, the students should be able to: 
 Explain the importance of documentation as a physician responsibility  
 Discuss the consequences of appropriate and inappropriate documentation on patient and employee safety  
 Observe the correct method of documentation in patient record  
 Reflect on the process  
Method: Large group session that gives an overview and demonstrates the documentation process and explains the right 
and wrong ways. 
 The students can be asked to do mock audit and discuss on patient records (dummy records) with a check list .Small 
group sessions with peer interaction to guide the new students on the process  
Assessment: Formative assessment

3. Community Orientation Module  
3A.  Community Orientation Module: National Health goals and policies/ health care systems / community health 
The medical student should be exposed from the beginning to the community in order to get a bird’s e ye view of the social, 
demographic, environmental and cultural factors that influence health and the system of health care delivery at the primary level 
of health care.  
FC 3.1  Demonstrate understanding of the National Health Goals and Policies  K KH 
FC 3.2  Discuss the national health scenario, demographic, socio cultural and  epidemiological 
issues  
K KH 
FC 3.3  Demonstrate understanding of  the health care systems in India with reference to 
primary, secondary and tertiary level care  
K KH 
FC 3.4 Discuss the basic principles of community health and its impact on health and disease S SH 
FC 3.5 Demonstrate understanding of t he structure and functioning of the community health 
center  
K KH 
Objectives: 
At the end of this session, the student will be able to: 
1. Explain the  National Health goals and policies  
2. Discuss the National health scenario, demographic, socio-cultural and  epidemiological issues  
3. Discuss the health care systems in India with reference to primary, secondary and tertiary level care  
4. Describe the basic principles of community health and its impact on Health and disease 
5. Observe the structure and functioning of the community health centre  
6. Reflect on the observation

Methodology 
No Sub Session Methods Requirements Time 
1 National Health: 
goals and policies 
Interactive l ecture on National health goals and 
policies  
 
LCD projector, Flip 
charts, Marker pens 
1 hour 
2 National health 
scenario 
Interactive l ecture on National health goals and 
policies  
 
LCD projector, Flip 
charts, Marker pens 
1 hour 
3 Health care systems 
in India 
Community Health Centre visit and reflection on the 
experience with particular reference to: 
A) Levels of health care in a community setting 
B) Interaction with families in the community setting 
and the impact of health  
C) Functioning of the Community Health Centre 
and health care team  
Community visit followed by a discussion back in 
the college 
Logistics for community 
visit 
4 hours 
4 Principles of 
community health 
5 Community Health 
Center 
Assessment: Formative: Reflection writing / discussion of the experience

3B. Community Orientation Module: Interactions with patients and families and communities. 
Exposure to the community in the beginning of their profession will sensitize the students to the ac tual community living of people, 
the disease impact in the community and its impact on the patient’s families and health workers.   
FC 3.6 Demonstrate ability to obtain patient experiences through patient and family 
interactions and relate these experiences to impact of environment and diseases. 
S SH 
 
Objectives: 
At the end of this session, the student will be able to demonstrate an understanding of: 
1. The effect of family and social environment in the aetiology of diseases  
2. Community beliefs and practices related to health and illnesses  
3. The environmental health problems in the community 
4. Patient experiences to diseases treatment-seeking practice 
Methodology 
No Sub Session Methods Requirements Time 
1 Interaction with 
patients and families 
and communities. 
 
 Community Health centre visit and reflection on 
the experience with particular reference to: 
 The effect of family and social environment in 
the aetiology of diseases  
 Community beliefs and practices related to 
Logistics for community 
visit 
LCD projector, Flip 
charts, Marker pens 
1 hour 
(The time for 
community visit is 
factored in in the 
previous session)

health and illnesses  
 The environmental health problems in the 
community 
 Patient experiences to diseases treatment-
seeking practice 
 Community visit followed by a discussion back in 
the college 
 
Assessment: Formative: Reflective writing of their observations

4. Professional Development and Ethics 
4A. Professional Development and Ethics Module: Concept of Professionalism and Ethics 
The students should be introduced to the concept of professionalism and ethics as an important domain in their learning and 
practice. They should be made aware of the code of conduct and its significance in life and career. 
FC 4.1  Demonstrate understanding of the concept of Professionalism and  ethics among 
health care professionals and discuss the consequences of unprofessional and 
unethical behavior  
S KH 
 
Objectives: 
At the end of this session, the student will be able to: 
1. Explain the concept of professionalism and ethics among health care professionals  
2. Describe the consequences of unprofessional and unethical behavior 
Methodology 
No Sub Session Methods Requirements Time 
1 Professionalism and 
Ethics – the concept 
 Interactive lecture about using case vignettes and video  
 Could use a drill with various scenarios depicting 
professional and unprofessional behaviour 
LCD projector, Flip 
charts, Marker pens 
 
1 hour 
2 Consequences of 
unprofessional and 
unethical behavior 
 Group work using case vignettes / video  
 Group presentation and discussion with reference to 
consequences of unprofessional and unethical behavior 
 1 hour 
Assessment: Formative assessment

4B. Professionalism and Ethics Module: White coat ceremony 
FC 4.2  Demonstrate understanding that compassion, altruism, integrity, duty, responsibility 
and trust are the core values that defines the nature of the physician’s work  
K KH 
Objective:  
At the end of the session, the student is able to:  
1. Appreciate the significance of White Coat Ceremony  
 
The white coat reminds physicians of their professional duties, as prescribed by Hippocrates, to lea d their lives and practic e 
their art in uprightness and honour. The white coat is a symbol of our profession. 
The White Coat Ceremony is a rite of passage, welcoming the new medical students into the medical pr ofession. As medical 
students, they are bound by the same professional commitments that bind all physicians. This ceremon y will join the symbol of 
the white coat with the virtues of altruism, responsibility, duty, honour, respect, and compassion. 
Assessment: Reflections

4C Professionalism and Ethics Module 3: Professional and altruistic behaviour 
FC 4.2  Demonstrate understanding that compassion, altruism, integrity duty , responsibility and trust 
are the core values that defines the nature of the Physician work  
K KH 
Objective  
At the end of the session, the student should be able to: 
 Describe Altruism  
 Discuss Altruism as an important professional virtue of a physician  
Assessment: Formative assessment while discussing in groups 
  
1 Altruism as a virtue 
of a Physician  
 Guest lecture / Address by the dean or director  
 Case based interactive lecture 
LCD projector, Flip 
charts, Marker pens 
1hour 
2 Case discussion   The students will discuss case in groups   1 hour

4D Professionalism and Ethics Module: Working in a health care team 
One of the major roles of the Indian Medical Graduate is that of being a member of a health care team. While the MBBS 
program is structured to build this competence during its course, an introduction to the concept of working in a team is essential 
at the beginning. 
FC 4.3 Discuss the value of honesty and respect during interaction with peers, seniors,  faculty, other 
health care workers and patients 
S KH 
FC 4.4 Discuss the significance of working in a health care team S KH 
Objectives: 
At the end of this session, the student will be able to: 
1. Describe the significance of working in a health care team 
2. Discuss the role of honesty ,respect and trust  
Methodology 
No Sub Session Methods Requirements Time 
1 Working in a health 
care team 
1. The students visit several patient care area and 
observe functioning of the Multidisciplinary 
teams, such as the emergency OPD, or OT, or 
labour room 
2. The students may be posted in small groups to 
observe and reflect with regard to the 5 
LCD projector, Flip 
charts, Marker pens 
 
1 hour

important aspects of working in a team: 
a. Shared goals 
b. Communication 
c. Leadership 
d. Role clarity 
e. Trust / respect  
3. Group presentation and discussion 
3. Assessment : Formative assessment during group discussions / presentations

4E Professionalism and ethics Module 5: Disability competencies 
As newly joined medical students, they need to recognize the importance of various deviations from m ajority that are happenin g in 
human life. Disability is part of human diversity. Differently abled individuals need to be understo od and recognized by any stream 
that deals with human life.  
 
India was one of the first major country who ratified the greatest human rights instrument of 21st C entury, the United Nation s 
Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (CRPD) and accordingly amended its disa bility legislation  incorporating 
human rights approach to Rights of Persons with Disabilities (RPDA) Act, 2016. The Act mandates indu cting disability content into 
all professional courses including medical field. 
Educational Strategy 
An Indian Medical Graduate is expected to have disability competence which  is the skills and attributes essential to provide quality 
health care to patients with disabilities. It is the social responsibility of medical institutions t o be empathetic towards t he 
marginalized section. Disability competencies and suggested teaching-learning methods are provided in table 2. 
Table 2. Disability Competencies under the Five Roles of the Indian Medical Graduate (IMG) 
IMG Role FC 4.5 
Competencies addressed 
 
The student should be able to: 
Domain Level Suggested TLM Duration

Clinician 4.5.1 Describe disability as per 
United Nations Convention on the 
Rights of Persons with Disabilities 
while demonstrating respect for the 
differences and capacities of 
persons with disabilities as part of 
human diversity and humanity. 
K KH Lecture/or panel discussion 
involving person with 
disability 
1 hour  
Clinician 4.5.2 Compare and contrast medical 
and social model of disability. 
K KH Patient narratives in small 
groups followed by sharing 
amongst groups 
Communicator 4.5.3 Build an understanding on the 
disability etiquettes while addressing 
people with disabilities 
S/A SH Standardized patient with 
disabilities in small groups 
followed by sharing 
amongst groups 
1 hour  
Lifelong learner 4.5.4 Demonstrate awareness of the 
disabilities included in the Rights of 
Persons with Disabilities Act, 2016. 
K KH Case histories, incidental 
reports in small groups 
followed by sharing 
amongst groups 
Communicator 4.5.5 Demonstrate the use of verbal 
and non-verbal empathetic 
communication techniques while 
communicating with people with 
disabilities 
S/A SH Clinical patient encounter 
with guidance in small 
groups followed by sharing 
amongst groups 
1 hour

Professional 4.5.6 Demonstrate a non-
discriminatory behaviour towards 
patients or caregivers with 
disabilities 
A SH Video or simulated 
encounters or Forum 
Theatre (Theatre of the 
Oppressed) Class room 
Session 
Lifelong learner 4.5.7 Have an understanding of 
accessible healthcare setting for 
patients with disabilities, including 
universal design 
K KH Functioning of NGO or 
accessible Disability Unit 
Visit or SGD-2 
hours 
Leader 4.5.8 Advocate social inclusion by 
raising awareness of the human 
rights of persons with disabilities. 
K KH Self-reflection paper/blog  
SDL 
SDL- 2 hours 
 
Modified-from Disability-inclusive Compassionate Care: Core Competencies on Disability for Health Professions Education by 
Medical Humanities Group, UCMS, Delhi

4F. Professionalism and Ethics Module: Cultural competence 
Cultural competence is the ability to interact respectfully with colleagues  from any culture and requires critical consciousness. It 
is a congruent set of behaviours, attitudes, skills, policy and procedures that come together in a s ystem, agency, or among 
individual professionals to enable them to work effectively in cross cultural situations. This is re levant for the medical students 
as they are joining MBBS in medical colleges throughout all states in India and students from outsid e India are also joining 
medical colleges in India. Therefore, the cross cultural component will help students a lot as the cultural diver sity is unique and 
vast in the country. 
FC 4.6 Demonstrate understanding and respect of cultural diversities and interact with those with 
different cultural values 
K/A KH 
Objectives: 
At the end of this session, the student will be able to: 
1. Describe components of cultural competence 
Methodology 
No Sub Session Methods Requirements Time 
1 Components of 
cultural competence 
 An interactive lecture on the components LCD projector, Flip 
charts, Marker pens 
1 hour

Professionalism and Ethics Module: Stress management  
The first year students are challenged with many changes including the new place,peers, atmosphere, environment and a major 
leap in the learning styles and contents. This induces stress making them vulnerable. Hence, it is important to address the role 
of stress during their learning period and methods to enhance their resilience.  
FC 4.7 Discuss the significance and methods of stress management and risk taking behaviour.  K KH 
FC 4.8 Understand  the role of yoga and meditation in personal health S S 
Objectives  
At the end of the session, the student should be able to: 
 Describe the situation that may cause stress during their learning period  
 Discuss the health impact of stress 
 Appreciate the various stress management techniques including yoga and meditation  
 Discuss the spectrum of risk - taking behaviour, consequences and ways to manage  
Case based discussion to be held in small groups on stressful situations such, academic stress, examination stress, peer pressure, 
family pressure, gender issues, discrimination, dealing with emotions. Various risk taking behaviours such as violence, drug abuse, 
rash driving, bullying etc. should be addressed. 
A Yoga / Meditation demonstration by an expert followed by reflection on the experience may be done.

4 H Professional Development and Ethics Module: Time management 
Good time management is essential for a Professional. Many deadlines for college work occur at the same time, and unless the 
student plans ahead, he/she will find it difficult to manage. Learning how to manage time will help them maintain academic 
performance as well as a life outside of school.  
FC 4.9 Discuss the significance and appropriate ways of time management  S SH 
 
Objectives: 
At the end of this session, the student will be able to: 
1. Describe the importance of time management 
2. Prioritize their activities in order to manage time better 
3. Identify and handle their own distractions and interruptions 
Methodology 
No Sub Session Methods Requirements Time 
1 Importance of time 
management 
 An interactive lecture  LCD projector, Flip 
charts, Marker pens 
1/2 hour 
2 Prioritization  Group work using the “action priority matrix” 
 Discussion 
 1 hour

3 Distractions and 
Interruptions 
 Administer the time management skills 
questionnaire 
 Students to reflect their own strengths 
 Ask students to work in groups and write down 
what they think are the main distractions / 
interruptions that a MBBS student will face.  
 Ask the groups to discuss and present the 
solutions to the above 
 1 hour 
4 Wrap up Summarize and take general feedback about the 
session 
 5 minutes 
 
Assessment: Formative

4I   Professional Development and Ethics Module: Interpersonal relationship 
The students should understand the role of interpersonal relationship while interacting with the pat ients, families, peers, 
superiors and health care personnel. They should understand the significance of these interactions a nd professional 
boundaries. They should understand and experience the role of mentoring in personal and professional growth. 
FC 4.10 Demonstrate understanding of importance of interpersonal relationship while working in 
a health care team  
S KH 
FC 4.11 Understand the role of mentoring  S KH 
Learning method:  
(1) Role plays to understand the significance of interpersonal relationship and group discussion 
(2) Interactive lecture on Mentoring followed by allotment of mentors to the new batch  
(3) Mentor-Mentee interaction and road ahead  
4J  Professionalism and Ethics: Learning 
After years of formal schooling, students enter the MBBS course often without having mastered the fu ndamental skills of learn ing. 
When they begin their course and are propelled into a more active learner mode, understanding of the se fundamentals becomes 
vital. Students will learn how to learn through many avenues, such as modelling, curiosity, and situat ional need. This session on 
learning is included in the Foundation Course as a way to help them understand the process learning. 
FC 4.12 Demonstrate understanding of the process of group learning and group dynamics S KH 
FC 4.13 Comprehend  the learning pedagogy and its role in learning skills  S KH

FC 4.14 Demonstrate understanding of different methods of self-directed learning  S KH 
FC 4.15 Understand collaborative learning S KH 
 
Objectives: 
1. To recognize the need to learn  
2. To identify and maximize one’s learning style 
3. To describe how people learn 
4. Experience collaborative and group learning  
5. Discuss the methods of SDL and its application in their routine learning  
Learning method  
 Students are subjected learning style evaluation and asked to reflect  
 Students are exposed to various methods through self -experience and role play and asked to reflect  
Assessment: Nil

5 Enhancement of Language and Computer Skills:  
 
5A Enhancement of Language and Computer Skills Module: Communication 
 
Good communication skills are essential for an optimal doctor -patient relationship, relationship between peers/colleagues and 
also colleagues in a team which ultimately also contributes to improved heal th outcomes. Training in communication skills 
needs approaches which are different from that of teaching other clinical subjects.  
FC5.1 Demonstrate ability to communicate with patient and families , be aware of barriers to 
communication and  appropriate ways to respond 
C  SH 
Objectives: 
At the end of this session, the student will be able to: 
1. Describe the basic elements of communication skills 
2. Explain the importance of listening and empathy in communication 
3. Explain the importance of good communication skills in medicine 
4. Recognise the common barriers to communication  
5. Observe patient and family interactions ( Videos , Role plays ) 
6. Reflect on the appropriate ways to respond  
Methodology 
No Sub Session Methods Requirements Time 
1 Basic communication skills  Lectures (PPT), role plays, group LCD projector, Flip charts, 3 hours

2 Listening skills discussions, brainstorming Marker pens 
3 Importance of empathy in 
communication skills 
4 Importance of good communication in 
medicine 
5 Observe patient and family interactions   Video demo / Role play of patient 
and family interaction 
 Ask students to reflect on 
appropriate and inappropriate 
responses   
Video   
Assessment: Formative during group discussions  
 
5B Enhancement Skills Module 8: Local Language skills  
The local language skills training will be conducted as per the felt need and may continue beyond the Foundation Course.  
FC 5.2 Demonstrate use of local language in patient and peer interactions  C SH 
Sessions will be organised in small groups and rotated between enhancement skills

5C  Enhancement Skills Module 8: English Language skills  
The English language skills training will be conducted as per the felt need and may continue beyond the Foundation Course. 
FC 5.3 Demonstrate ability to communicate  and learn in English  C SH 
Sessions will be organised in small groups and rotated between enhancement skills  
Enhancement of Language and computer skills Module: Basic computer skills  
 
The students should be competent in the use of ICT in teaching and learning. The students should be introduced to the basic use of 
word and power point, familiar with search engines, in performing a literature search and accessing online resources. 
  
FC 5.4 Demonstrate basic computer skills  S SH 
FC 5.5 Demonstrate ability for accessing online resources  S SH 
The students are posted to the computer / Active learning centre for the training and it will continue as per need of the students 
beyond Foundation Course  
6 Sports and extracurricular activities 
Should be for a mandatory 4 hours per week and extra-curricular activities 2 hours per week, subject to a maximum of 22 hours 
1. Further Reading link  
https://www.mciindia.org/CMS/wp-content/uploads/2019/01/UG-Curriculum-Vol-I.pdf 
https://www.mciindia.org/CMS/wp-content/uploads/2019/01/UG-Curriculum-Vol-II.pdf 
https://www.mciindia.org/CMS/wp-content/uploads/2019/01/UG-Curriculum-Vol-III.pdf 
https://www.mciindia.org/CMS/wp-content/uploads/2019/01/AETCOM_book.pdf