No. D-11011/500/2024-AcademicCell  (e-
8284443)  
Government of India
National Medical Commission
 
 
 
Sector-8, Dwarka
New Delhi-110075
12-09-2024
 
Subject: Guidelines for Competency Based Medical Education (CBME) Curriculum
2024– regarding
 
The revised guidelines for Competency Based Medical Education (CBME)
Curriculum 2024 by the Under Graduate Medical Education Board (UGMEB) is enclosed
herewith. All concerned stakeholders are requested to kindly take note of the same.
 
Encl.: As above
                                                                                                                                           
 
                                                                                                                                                   
        DR B SRINIVAS
SECRETARY
 
Copy to:
i. ACS/ PS/ Secretaries/ Department/s of Medical Education in all States/ Union
Territories
ii. PPS to Chairman, NMC
iii. PPS to President(UGMEB)  
iv. DMMP-I System Integrator- for uploading of NMC Website
v. Guard File
D-11011/500/2024-AcademicCell I/3706829/2024

1  
COMPETENCY BASED MEDICAL EDUCATION (CBME) CURRICULUM 2024 
 
1. Preamble 
 
The new Graduate Medical Educati on Regulations (GMER) attempt t o stand on the 
shoulders of the contributions a nd the efforts of resource persons, teachers and students 
(past and present). It intends to prepare the learner to provide health care to the evolving 
needs of the nation and the world. 
Following the Regulations on Gra duate Medical Education (GMER) 1997, a new crisp 
‘avatar’ in the form of GMER 2023 was placed last year. Since five years are completed 
after implementation of CBME it was time to have a relook at al l aspects of the various 
components in the existing regulations and guidelines, and adap t them to the changing 
demography, socio-economic cont ext, perceptions, values, advanc ements in medical 
education and expectations of st akeholders. Emerging health car e issues particularly in 
the context of emerging diseases , impact of adva nces in science  and technology and 
shorter distances on diseases and their management also need consideration. 
The thrust in the new guidelines is put on continuation and evo lution of medical 
education based on feedback and experience of CBME in the last 5 years since its 
inception in 2019, making it more learner-centric, patient-cent ric, gender- sensitive, 
outcome-oriented and environment appropriate. The result is an outcome driven 
curriculum which conforms to global trends. Emphasis is made on  alignment and 
integration of subjects both horizontally and vertically while respecting the strengths and 
necessity of subject-based instruction and assessment. This has necessitated a deviation 
from using "broad competencies"; instead, the reports have written end of phase subject 
competencies. These "competencies" can be mapped to the global competencies in the 
Graduate Medical Education Regulations. 
The importance of ethical values, responsiveness to the needs o f the patient and 
acquisition of communication skills is underscored by providing  dedicated time in 
curriculum in the form of a longitudinal program titled ‘AETCOM ’ based on Attitude, 
Ethics and Communication (AETCOM) competencies. Great emphasis has been placed 
on collaborative and inter disciplinary teamwork, professionali sm, altruism and respect 
in  professional  relationships  with  due  sensitivity  to  di fferences  in  thought,

2  
socioeconomic position and gender. 
 
 
2. Objectives of the Indian Graduate Medical Training Programme 
 
The undergraduate medical educatio n program is designed with a goal to create an 
"Indian Medical Graduate" (IMG)  possessing requisite knowledge,  skills, attitudes, 
values and responsiveness, so that she or he may function appro priately and effectively 
as a physician of first contact of the community while being globally relevant. To achieve 
this, the following national and institutional goals for the le arner of the Indian Medical 
Graduate training program are hereby prescribed. The first contact physician needs to be 
skillful to perform duties of pr imary care physician and have r equisite skills for 
promotive, preventative, rehabilitative, palliative care & refe rral services. 
3. National Goals 
At the end of undergraduate program, the Indian Medical Graduate should be able to: 
a) Recognize "health for all" as a national goal and health right of all citizens and by 
undergoing training for medical profession to fulfill his social obligations towards 
realization of this goal. 
b) Learn key aspects of National policies on health and devote himself to its practical 
implementation. 
c) Achieve competence in the practice of holistic medicine, encomp assing 
promotive, preventive, curative and rehabilitative aspects of common diseases. 
d) Develop scientific tem per, acquire educational experience for p roficiency in 
profession and promote healthy living. 
e) Become an exemplary citizen by observance of medical ethics and fulfilling social 
and professional obligations, so as to respond to national aspirations. 
4. Institutional Goals 
In consonance with the national goals, each medical institution  should evolve 
institutional goals to define the kind of trained manpower (or professionals) they intend 
to produce. The Indian Medical Graduates coming out of a medica l institute should be 
competent in diagnosis and manage ment of common health problems of the individual

3  
and the community, commensurate with his/her position as a member of the health team 
at the primary, secondary or tertiary levels, using his/her clinical skills based on history, 
physical examination and relevant investigations. 
a. Be competent for working in the health care team from Phase 1 M BBS to 
Compulsory rotatory medical in ternship (CRMI) in a gradual mann er with 
increasing complexity in an integrated multi-department involvement. 
b. Be competent to practice preventive, promotive, curative, palli ative and 
rehabilitativeꞏ medicine in respect to the commonly encountered health problems. 
c. Appreciate rationale for differe nt therapeutic modalities; be f amiliar with the 
administration of the "essential medicines" and their common adverse effects. 
d. Appreciate the socio-psychologica l, cultural, economic and envi ronmental factors 
affecting health and develop hum ane attitude towards the patien ts in discharging 
one's professional responsibilities. 
e. Possess the attitude for continued self-learning and to seek fu rther expertise or to 
pursue research in any chosen area of medicine, action research and documentation 
skills. 
f. Be familiar with the basic factors which are essential for the implementation of the 
National Health Programs including practical aspects of the following: 
i) Family Welfare and Maternal and Child Health (MCH); 
 
ii) Sanitation and water supply; 
 
iii) Prevention and control of communicable and non-communicable diseases; 
 
iv) Immunization; 
 
v) Health Education and advocacy; 
 
vi) Indian Public Health Standards (IPHS) at various level of service 
delivery;

4  
vii) Bio-medical waste disposal; 
 
viii) Organizational and or institutional arrangements. 
g. Acquire basic management skills in the area of human resources,  m a t e r i a l s  a n d  
resource management related to health care delivery, general an d hospital 
management, principal inventory skills and counseling. 
h. Be able to identify community health problems and learn to work to resolve these by 
designing, instituting corrective steps and evaluating outcome of such measures with 
maximum community participation. 
i. Be able to work as a leading part ner in health care teams and a cquire proficiency in 
communication skills. 
j. Be competent to work in a variety of health care settings. 
k.  Have personal characteristics and attitudes required for profe ssional life including 
personal integrity,  sense of responsibility and depe ndability and ability to relate  to 
or show concern for other individuals. 
5. Goals for the Learner 
 
In order to fulfill these goals, the Indian Medical Graduate must be able to function in the 
following Roles appropriately and effectively:- 
a. Clinician who understands and provides preventive, promotive, curative, 
palliative and holistic care with compassion. 
b. Leader and member of the health care t eam and system with capabilitie s to 
collect, analyze, synthesize and communicate health data appropriately. 
c. Communicate with patients , families, colleagues, and community in a 
methodological and skillful way using various approaches in family visits, family 
adoption program, clinic-social cases, clinical cases and AETCO M training 
programs.

5  
d. Lifelong learner committed to continuous improvement of skills and knowledge. 
e. Professional, who is committed to excellenc e, is ethical, responsive and 
accountable to patients, communi ty and profession and society. Training of 
humanities and social sciences will be useful for this training. 
f. Critical Thinker who demonstrates problem solving skills in professional practice 
g. Researcher who generates and interprets evidence to ensure effective pati ent care as 
well as contribute in the field of medical research and practice. 
6. Competency Based Training Programme of the Indian Medical Graduate 
 
Competency based learning woul d include designing and implement ing medical 
education curriculum that focuses on the desired and observable  ability in real life 
situations. In order to effectively fulfill the roles, the Indian Medical Graduate would have 
obtained the following set of competencies at the time of graduation: 
a. Clinician, who understands and provides preventive, promotive, curative, 
palliative and holistic care with compassion. 
• Demonstrate knowledge of normal hum an structure, function and d evelopment 
from a molecular, cellular, biologic, clinical, behavioral and social perspective. 
• Demonstrate knowledge of abnormal human structure, function and  development 
from a molecular, cellular, biological, clinical, behavioral and social perspective. 
• Demonstrate knowledge of medico-l egal, societal, ethical and hu manitarian 
principles that influence healthcare. 
• Demonstrate knowledge of national and regional health care policies including the 
National Health Mission that incorporates National Rural Health Mission (NRHM) 
and National Urban Health Mission (NUHM), frameworks, economics and systems 
that influence health promotion, health care delivery, disease prevention, 
effectiveness, responsiveness, quality and patient safety. 
• Demonstrate ability to elicit and record from the patient, and other relevant sources 
including relatives and caregivers, a history that is complete and relevant to disease

6  
identification, disease prevention and health promotion. 
• Demonstrate ability to elicit a nd record from the patient, and other relevant 
sources. including relatives and caregivers, a history that is contextual to gender, 
age, vulnerability, social and economic status, patient prefere nces, beliefs and 
values. 
• Demonstrate ability to perform a physical examination that is complete and 
relevant to disease identification, disease prevention and health promotion. 
• Demonstrate ability to perform a  physical examination that is c ontextual to 
gender, social and economic status, patient preferences and values. 
• Demonstrate effective clinical  problem solving, judgment and ab ility to interpret 
and integrate available data in order to address patient proble ms, generate 
differential diagnoses and devel op individualized management pl ans that include 
preventive, promotive and therapeutic goals. 
• Maintain accurate, clear and appropriate record of the patient in conformation with 
legal and administrative frameworks. 
• Demonstrate ability to choose th e appropriate diagnostic tests and interpret these 
tests based on scientific validity, cost effectiveness and clinical context. 
• Demonstrate ability to prescribe and safely administer appropri ate therapies 
including nutritional interventi ons, pharmacotherapy and interv entions based on 
the principles of rational drug therapy, scientific validity, e vidence and cost that 
confirm to established national and regional health programmers  and policies for 
the following: 
o Disease prevention, 
o Health promotion and cure, 
o Pain and distress alleviation, and 
o Rehabilitation and palliation. 
• Demonstrate ability to provide a continuum of care at the prima ry (including 
home care) and/or secondary level that addresses chronicity, mental and physical 
disability, 
• Demonstrate ability to appropriately identify and refer patients who may requireꞏ

7  
specialized or advanced tertiary care. 
• Demonstrate familiarity with basic, clinical and translational research as it applies 
to the care of the patient. 
b. Leader and member of the health care team and system 
 
• Work effectively and appropriate ly with colleagues in an inter- professional 
health care team respecting diversity of roles, responsibilities and competencies 
of other professionals. 
• Recognize and function effectivel y, responsibly and appropriate ly as a health 
care team leader in primary and secondary health care settings.   Educate and 
motivate other members of the team and work in a collaborative and collegial 
fashion that will help maximize the health care delivery potential of the team. 
• Access and utilize components of the health care system and health delivery in a 
manner that is appropriate, cost effective, fair and in compliance with the 
national health care priorities and policies, as well as be able to collect, analyze 
and utilize health data. 
• Participate appropriately and effectively in measures that will advance quality 
of health care and patient safety within the health care system. 
• Recognize and advocate health. pr omotion, disease prevention and health care 
quality improvement through preven tion and early recognition: i n a) life style 
diseases and b) cancer, in colla boration with other members of the health care 
team. 
 
c. Communicator with patients, families, colleagues and community 
 
• Demonstrate ability to communica te adequately, sensitively, eff ectively and 
respectfully with patients, fami lies, colleagues and community in a language 
that they understand and in a manner that will be mutually sati sfying and 
beneficial to them as well as care givers cum learners to yield  positive health 
care outcomes. 
• Demonstrate ability to establish professional relationships with patients, families,

8  
colleagues and community that a re positive, understanding, huma ne, ethical, 
empathetic, and trustworthy. 
• Demonstrate ability to communicate with patients, families, col leagues and 
community in a manner respectful of patient’s preferences, valu es, prior 
experience, beliefs, confidentiality and privacy. 
• Demonstrate ability to communica te with patients, colleagues an d families in a 
manner that encourages participation and shared decision-making and overcoming 
hesitancy towards health initiatives. 
d. Lifelong learner committed to continuous improvement of skills and knowledge 
 
• Demonstrate ability to perform an objective self-assessment of knowledge and 
skills, continue learning, refine existing skills and acquire new skills. 
• Demonstrate ability to apply newly gained knowledge or skills to the care of the 
patient. 
• Demonstrate ability to introsp ect and utilize experiences, to e nhance personal 
and professional growth and learning. Demonstrate ability to search (including 
through electronic means), and critically re- evaluate the medical literature and 
apply the information in the care of the patient. 
• Be able to identify and select an appropriate career pathway that is professionally 
rewarding and personally fulfilling. 
 
e. P r o f e s s i o n a l  w h o  i s  c o m m i t t e d  t o  e x c e l l e n c e ,  i s  e t h i c a l ,  r e s p o nsive and 
accountable to patients, the profession and community. 
• Practice selflessness, integrity, responsibility, accountability and respect. 
• Respect and maintain professional boundaries between patients, colleagues and 
society. 
• Demonstrate ability to recognize and manage ethical and professional conflicts. 
• Abide by prescribed ethical and legal codes of conduct and practice. 
• Demonstrate commitment to the growth of the medical profession as a whole.

9  
f. Critical Thinker who demonstrates problem solving skills in professional practice 
 Perceive, analyse, synthesise a nd evaluate information obtained  through observation, 
experience and communication that leads to rational clinical decision. 
 Evaluate the credibility of information resources. 
 Adequately consider the social,  cultural and geographical diver sity while practicing 
personalized medicine  
 Develop independence of thought, cl arity, integrity and self co nfidence in decision 
making. 
g. Researcher who generates and interprets evidence to ensure effe ctive patient care as 
well as contribute in the field of medical research and practice. 
 Read, review, appraise and critique the scientific body of literature for practice of   
           Evidence Based Medicine. 
 Apply methodological approach to scientific enquiry for generating evidence. 
 Demonstrate basic principles and ethical implications of research governance. 
A. CURRICULUM (subject wise competencies are given in Competency Based 
Undergraduate Curriculum 2024 on NMC website) 
 Phase 1 : 
1. ANATOMY 
Subject Goals: 
 
At the end of anatomy teaching, a student should be able to demonstrate: 
 
i. Comprehension of normal structure, development and genetic pattern of organ and 
organ systems, as well as the clinical correlation of structure s involved in diseases 
and its anatomical basis.

10 
ii. Comprehension of the normal disp osition, clinically relevant in ter-relationships, 
functional and cross -sectional Anatomy of the various organs and structures of the 
body. 
iii. Identification of the microscopic structure of various organs a nd tissues with the 
functions, as a prerequisite for  understanding the altered stat e in various disease 
processes. 
iv. Basic principles and sequential development of the organs and s ystems; recognize 
the critical stages of development and the effects of common te ratogens, genetic 
mutations and environmental hazards. 
v. Principles of karyotyping and identify the gross congenital anomalies. 
 
vi. Principles of newer imaging techniques and interpretation of CT  scan, sonogram, 
MRI & Angiography. 
 
 
2. PHYSIOLOGY 
Subject Goals: 
At the end of physiology teaching, the learner must be able to: 
i. Demonstrate knowledge of normal human physiology, organizational and functional 
relationship between cells, tissues and organs and body systems, age and sex related 
physiological changes in the organ functions that reflect norma l growth and 
development. 
ii. Explain physiological variations (Genotype/Phenotype) with healthy ageing through 
the course of life i.e. fetal, neonatal, chil dhood, adolescence  and adulthood and 
demonstrate understanding of the  physiological responses and ad aptation to 
environment and exercise. 
iii. Perform experiments to demonstr ate physiological phenomenon and  principles, 
interpret investigation results falling within the scope of physiology.

11 
iv. Apply principles of Physiology in clinicopat hological condition s, diagnosis, 
investigations and management of diseased conditions. 
v. Conduct physical examination (general and system based) of normal subject in real 
or simulated conditions and demonstrate understanding of altere d findings in 
physical examination of diseased conditions. 
3. BIOCHEMISTRY 
Subject Goals: 
The learner after teaching learn ing in Biochemistry should be able to: 
i. Understand and explain Biochemica l and molecular processes invo lved in 
health and disease. 
ii. Enlist and describe the cell orga nelles with their molecular an d functional 
organization. 
iii. Understand basic enzymology and emphasize on its clinical appli cations 
wherein regulation of enzymatic activity is disturbed. 
iv. Describe Importance of nutrition in health and disease. 
 
v. Describe digestion and assimilation of nutrients and consequences of 
                         malnutrition. 
 
vi. Describe function and interrela tionships of various biomolecule s and 
consequences of deviation from the normal. 
vii. Describe and integrate metabolic pathways of various biomolecules with their 
regulatory mechanisms relevant to clinical conditions. 
viii. Describe Biochemical basis and rationale of clinical laboratory tests, Perform 
biochemical analytical tests relevant to clinical screening and  diagnosis 
using conventional techniques / in struments and interpret inves tigative 
data. 
ix. Explain the biochemical basis of inherited disorders with their  associated

12 
sequel. 
x. Describe mechanisms involved in maintenance of water, electroly te and acid 
base balance and consequences of their imbalances. 
xi. Outline basics genetics, explain the molecular mechanisms of gene expression 
and regulation, basic principles of biotechnology and latest techniques and 
their applications in medicine. 
xii. Demonstrate the skills of solving scientific and clinical problems and decision 
making. 
 
 Phase 2 : 
4. PATHOLOGY 
Subject Goals: 
At the end of the teaching learning in pathology learner should be able to: 
 
i. Demonstrate knowledge of causes, mechanisms, alterations in gross and cellular 
morphology of organs in disease states. 
ii. Explain, interpret and analyse the pathology with clinical condition including 
diseases which are locally and regionally relevant. 
iii. Perform experiments to demonstrate routine pathological investigations on blood 
and explain principles, interpret investigation results. 
iv. Perform experiments to demonstrate routine pathological investigations on the 
various biological samples and explain principles, interpret investigation results. 
v. Demonstrate updated pathological investigations on the various biological 
samples. 
5. MICROBIOLOGY 
Subject goals 
At the end of Microbiology teaching-learning activities learner should be able to:

13 
 
i. Comprehend the immunological mechanisms in health and disease. 
 
ii. Comprehend the of role of microbial agents in health and disease. 
 
iii. Correlate the natural history, mechanisms and clinical manifestations of 
infectious diseases as they relate to the properties of microbial agents. 
iv. Comprehend the principles and application of infection control measures. 
 
v. Comprehend the basis of choice of laboratory diagnostic tests and their 
interpretation. 
vi. Comprehend the principles of antimicrobial therapy and the control and 
prevention of infectious diseases. 
vii. Comprehend the mechanisms of anti microbial resistance (AMR) and its 
prevention along with concept and application of the antimicrob ial 
stewardship program. 
viii. Demonstrate the knowledge of outbreak investigation and its control. 
 
ix. Describe commensals, opportunistic and pathogenic organisms and explain host 
parasite relationship. 
x. Describe the characteristics (m orphology, cultural characterist ics, resistance, 
virulence factors, incubation pe riod, mode of transmission etc. ) of different 
microorganisms. 
xi. Explain the various defense mechan isms of the host against the microorganisms 
which can cause human infection. 
xii. Describe the laboratory diagnosis of microorganisms causing human infections 
and disease. 
xiii. Describe the prophylaxis for the particular infecting microorganisms. 
 
xiv. Operate routine and sophisticated instruments in the laboratory.

14 
 
xv. Demonstrate respect for patient samples, confidentiality pertai ning to patient 
identity in laboratory results and effective communication skills in patient care. 
6. PHARMACOLOGY 
Subject Goals: 
 
At the end of teaching learning in pharmacology, the student should be able to: 
 
i. Know about essential and commonly used drugs and an understandi ng of the 
pharmacologic basis of therapeutics. 
ii. Apply pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic concept of drugs to drug selection 
and dosage regimens. 
iii. Explain mechanism of action of commonly used drugs. 
 
iv. Select and rationally prescribe  drugs based on clinical conditi on and the 
pharmacologic properties, efficac y, safety and cost of medicine s for common 
clinical conditions of national importance. 
v. Understand generic, branded, over the counter (OTC) and prescription only drugs. 
 
vi. Understand pharmacovigilance and identify adverse drug reaction s and drug 
interactions of commonly used drugs. 
 
vii. Understand essential medicine concept and explore sources of drug information. 
 
viii. Administer drugs through various common routes of administration. 
 
ix. Understand and apply concept of e vidence based medicine and rat ional use of 
drugs. 
x. Communicate well in imparting drug related information to patients. 
 
xi. Knows basics of new drug delivery and industry-doctor relationship. 
 
xii. Critically analyze drug promotional literature and drug formulations.

15 
 
xiii. Understand regulatory and ethical aspects of drug discovery and drug use. 
 
 PHASE III PART I 
 
7. FORENSIC MEDICINE AND TOXICOLOGY 
Subject Goals: 
At the end of teaching learning in forensic medicine and toxicology, the student should be 
able to: 
i. Comprehend Medico-legal respons ibilities of a general physician while rendering 
community service either in a rural primary health center or an urban health center. 
ii. Comprehend of basic Medico-legal aspects of hospital and general practice. 
 
iii. Understand the rational approach to the investigation of crime, based on scientific and 
legal principles. 
iv. Understand the medico-legal frame work of medical practice, code s of conduct, 
medical ethics, Professional Misconduct and Medical Negligence. 
v. Conduct Medico-legal examination  and documentation of various M edico-legal 
cases. Identify and interpret important post-mortem findings in common unnatural 
deaths. 
 
vi. Conduct postmortem examination and Preparation of postmortem reports in unnatural 
deaths- Suicidal, Homicidal, Accidental. 
vii. Prepare Medical Certificate of Cause of Death (MCCD) and Medico -legal reports of 
injuries and age estimation. 
viii. Conduct examination and documenta tion of sexual offences, intox ication cases and 
preservation of relevant ancillary materials for medico-legal examination. 
ix. Analyse, Diagnose, manage legal aspects of common acute and chr onic poisoning 
cases.

16 
x. Understand of latest Acts and laws related to medical professio nal including related 
Court judgements e.g. MTP Act, CPA, HOTA etc. 
8. COMMUNITY MEDICINE 
 
Subject Goals: 
At the end of teaching learning in Community Medicine, the student should be able to: 
 
i. Demonstrate understanding of rol e of primary care physician for  preventive, 
promotive, curative, rehabilitative, palliative care & referral  services. 
ii. Demonstrate understanding of the  concept of health and disease,  demography, 
population dynamics and disease bur den in National and global c ontext, 
comprehension of principles of health economics and hospital management. 
iii. Apply the understanding of physic al, social, psychological, eco nomic and 
environmental determinants of health and disease, ability to recognize and manage 
common health problems including  physical, emotional and social  aspects at 
individual family and community level in the context of Nationa l Health 
Programmes,  
iv. Ability to implement and monitor National Health Programmes in the primary care setting. 
v. Ability to recognize, investigate, report, plan and manage comm unity health problems 
including malnutrition and emergencies. 
vi. Apply understanding the role of nutrition in health promotion and disease 
prevention. 
vii. Demonstrate role of researcher & community medicine physician by understanding 
the concepts of various epidemiological study designs and their application and 
epidemiology of diseases and ability to critically review. 
viii. Demonstrate understanding of pandemic and epidemic situations with emerging 
and re-emerging diseases and able to investigate under supervis ion and plan, 
advise and promote preventive aspects as per international and national health

17 
regulations and programs. 
ix. Demonstrate understanding of all principles of public health, community medicine, 
preventive aspects, social aspects utilizing family adoption program , providing 
services to the families adopted and being first care physician under the guidance 
of mentor. 
x. Apply the principles of behaviour change communication for improving health 
related aspects for communicable, non-communicable diseases, health promotive 
aspects, related to addictions, health related information and misinformation. 
9. OTO-RHINOLARYNGOLOGY (ENT) 
 
Subject Goals: 
 
At the end of training in ENT, the learner should be able to: 
 
i. Demonstrate knowledge of the co mmon Otorhinolaryngological (ENT ) 
emergencies and problems. 
ii. Recognize, diagnose and manage com mon ENT emergencies and probl ems in 
primary care setting. 
iii. Perform simple ENT procedures as applicable in a primary care setting. 
iv. Recognize hearing impairment and refer to the appropriate heari ng impairment 
rehabilitation programme.  
v. Communicate to patients in respectful non-threatening non-judgmental empathetic 
manner appropriately  
vi. Identify, discuss and defend medicolegal socio cultural and eth ical issues as they 
pertain to consent for ENT surgi cal procedures and address pati ents queries in 
patient undergoing a basic ENT surgical procedure in a simulated environment.

18 
10. OPHTHALMOLOGY 
 
Subject Goals: 
 
The student after teaching / learning in Ophthalmology should be able to: 
 
i. Demonstrate knowledge of common eye disease in the community and the 
ability to diagnose and manage the common eye disease in primary care set 
up. 
ii. Recognize diagnose and manage (primary management) of ocular 
emergencies in primary care setting and have knowledge of the indication for 
their referral. 
iii. Demonstrate knowledge about various cause of blindness and visual 
impairment in the community. 
iv. Demonstrate knowledge about various national programs for the control of 
blindness in the community and their implementation in the primary care 
setting. 
v. Demonstrate knowledge about common Ocular drugs, their mechanism of 
action, their pharmaceutical, indications dosage schedule, side effects and 
complications. 
vi. Demonstrate knowledge about common ocular surgeries, their indication and 
counselling regarding various ocular procedures and indications for referral 
from primary care setting. 
vii. Demonstrate knowledge about eye donations, eye transplantation and eye 
bank. 
viii. Perform simple ocular procedures as applicable in primary care setting. 
ix. Be a team member of national program for control of blindness. 
 
x. Have good rapport with public, colleagues, superiors and subordinates. 
 
xi. Counsel patients and their families regarding various ocular conditions, 
management, indication for referral. 
xii. Counsel the blind and visually impaired patients regarding their 
Rehabilitation.

19 
 Phase III PART - II 
 
 
11. GENERAL MEDICINE 
 
Subject Goals: 
 
At the end of training learning in general medicine, the learner should be able to: 
 
i. Demonstrate understanding of the pathophysiologic basis, epidemiological 
profile, signs and symptoms of disease and their investigation and 
management. 
ii.      Competently interview and exam ine an adult patient and mak e a clinical 
diagnosis. 
iii.      Appropriately order and interpret laboratory tests. 
 
iv.      Initiate appropriate cost-effective treatment based on an understanding of 
the rational drug prescriptions, medical interventions required  a n d  
preventive measures. 
v.      Follow up of patients with medical problems and refer whenever required. 
 
vi.       Communicate effectively, educate and counsel the patient and family. 
 
vii.      Manage common medical emergencies and refer when required. 
 
viii.      Independently perform common medical procedures safely and  
understand patient safety issues. 
ix.      Diagnose common clinical disorders with special reference to infectious 
diseases, nutritional disorders, tropical and environmental diseases. 
x.      Outline various modes of mana gement including drug therape utics 
especially dosage, side effects, toxicity, interactions, indica tions and 
contra- indications. 
xi.     Propose diagnostic and investigative procedures and ability to interpret them. 
 
xii.      Provide first level management of acute emergencies prompt ly and 
efficiently and decide the timing and level of referral, if required. 
xiii.     Recognize geriatric disorders and their management.

20 
xiv.       Develop clinical skills (his tory taking. clinical examina tion and other 
instruments of examination) to diagnose various common medical 
disorders and emergencies; 
xv.      Refer a patient to secondary and/or tertiary level of health care after having 
instituted primary care. 
xvi.       Perform simple routine investigations like hemogram, stool, urine, sputum 
and biological fluid examinations. 
xvii.      Assist the common bedside investigative procedure like ple ural tap, 
Lumbar puncture, bone marrow aspiration/biopsy and liver biopsy. 
 
12. PEDIATRICS 
 
Subject Goals: 
 
At end of training on pediatrics, the student should be able to: 
 
i. Assess and promote optimal growth, development and nutrition of children and 
adolescents and identify deviations from normal. 
ii. Recognize and provide emergency and routine ambulatory and First Level 
Referral Unit care for neonates, infants, children and adolescents and refer as 
may be appropriate. 
iii. Perform procedures as indicated for children of all ages in the primary care 
setting. 
iv. Recognize children with special needs and refer appropriately. 
 
v. Promote health and prevent diseases in children. 
vi. Participate in National Programmes related to child health and in conformation 
with the Integrated Management of Neonatal and Childhood Illnesses (IMNCI) 
Strategy. 
vii. Communicate appropriately and effectively. 
 
viii. Describe the normal Growth and Development during fetal life, Neonatal 
period, Childhood and Adolescence and the deviations thereof. 
ix. Describe the common Pediatric disorders and emergencies in terms of 
Epidemiology, Etiopathogenesis, Clinical manifestations, Diagnosis and also 
describe the rational therapy and rehabilitation services.

21 
x. Workout age related requirements of calories, nutrients, fluids, dosages of 
drugs etc. in health and disease. 
xi. Describe preventive strategies for common infectious disorders, Malnutrition, 
Genetic and Metabolic disorders, Poisonings, Accidents and Child abuse. 
xii. Outline national programs related to child health including Immunization 
programs. 
xiii. Take detailed Pediatric and Neonatal history and conduct an appropriate 
physical examination of children and neonates, make clinical diagnosis, 
conduct common. 
xiv. Bedside investigative procedures, interpret common laboratory investigations, 
plan and institute therapy. 
 
xv. Take anthropometric measurements, resuscitate newborn, prepare oral 
rehydration solution, perform tuberculin test, administer vaccines available 
under current National programs, perform venesection, start intravenous fluids 
and provide nasogastric feeding. 
 
xvi. Demonstrat knowledge about all steps of the diagnostic procedures such as 
lumbar puncture, liver and kidney biopsy, bone marrow aspiration, pleural 
and ascitic tap. 
xvii. Distinguish between normal Newborn babies and those requiring special care 
and institute early care to all newborn babies including care of preterm and low 
birth weight babies, provide correct guidance and counseling about 
Breast feeding and Complementary feeding. 
 
xviii. Provide ambulatory care to all not so sick children, identify indications for 
specialized/ inpatient care and ensure timely referral to those who require 
hospitalization. 
13. DERMATOLOGY, VENEREOLOGY AND LEPROSY 
Subject Goals: 
                     At the end of training, the learner should be able to: 
 
i. Demonstrate understanding of the  principles of diagnosis of dis eases of the skin,

22 
hair, nail and mucosa. 
ii. Recognize, diagnose, order appropriate investigations and treat  common diseases of 
the skin including leprosy in the primary care setting and refer as appropriate. 
iii. Learn a syndromic approach to th e recognition, diagnosis, preve ntion, counseling, 
testing and management of common  sexually transmitted diseases including HIV 
based on national health priorities. 
iv.  Recognize and treat emergencies including drug reactions and refer as appropriate. 
v.  Counsel and provide patient education on safe sexual behaviors / disease prevention/ 
prognosis including pretest counseling for HIV. 
 
14. PSYCHIATRY 
 
Subject Goals: 
 
                                At the end of training, the learner should be able to: 
 
i. Promote mental health and mental hygiene. 
 
ii. Identify clinical features, make diagnosis and manage common psychiatric 
disorders across all ages. 
iii. Identify and manage psychotic disorders, mainly schizophrenia. 
 
iv. Identify and manage stress related psychiatric disorders, institute 
preliminary treatment in disorders difficult to manage, and refer 
appropriately. 
v. Identify alcohol/ substance abuse disorders and refer them to appropriate 
centers. 
vi. Assess the risk for suicide and refer appropriately. 
 
 
15. GENERAL SURGERY 
Subject Goals: 
At the end of training in general surgery, the student should be able to: 
 
i. Demonstrate understanding of the structural and functional basis, principles of 
 diagnosis and management of common surgical problems in adults and children.

23 
ii.  Choose, calculate and administer appropriately intravenous fluids,  
       electrolytes, blood and blood products based on the clinical condition. 
iii. Apply the principles of asepsis, sterilization, disinfection, rational use of 
      prophylaxis, therapeutic utilities of antibiotics and universal precautions in  
      surgical practice.   
iv. Demonstrate knowledge about common malignancies in India and their prevention,  
      early detection and therapy. 
v. Perform common diagnostic and surgical procedures at the primary care level. 
vi. Demonstrate knowledge about organ retrieval from deceased donor and living donor. 
vii. Administer informed consent and counsel patient prior to surgical procedures. 
viii. Describe etiology, pathophysiology, principles of diagnosis and management 
of common surgical problems including emergencies in adult and children. 
ix. Describe common malignancies in the country and their management 
including prevention. 
x. Enumerate different types of anesthetic agents, their indications, 
contraindications, mode of administration, and side effects. 
xi.  Plan various laboratory tests for surgical conditions and interpret the results.  
xii. Identify and manage patients of hemorrhagic, septicemia and other types of 
shock. 
xiii. Recognize, resuscitate, stabilize and provide Basic Life Support to patients 
following trauma. 
xiv. Monitor patient of head, chest, spinal and abdominal injuries, both in adults 
and children. 
xv. Provide primary care for a patient of burns. 
xvi. Acquire principles of operative surgery including preoperative, operative and 
post operative care and monitoring. 
xvii. Treat open wound including preventive measures against tetanus and gas 
gangrene.

24 
 
16. OBSTETRICS AND GYNAECOLOGY 
 
Subject Goals: 
 
At the end of training in Obstetrics and gynecology, the learner should be able to: 
 
i. Provide preconceptional counseling and antenatal care. 
 
ii. Identify high-risk pregnancies and refer appropriately. 
 
iii. Conduct normal deliveries, using safe delivery practices in the  primary and 
secondary care settings. 
iv. Prescribe drugs safely and appropriately in pregnancy and lactation. 
 
v. Diagnose complications of labor, institute primary care and refer in timely manner. 
 
vi. Perform early neonatal resuscitation. 
 
vii. Provide postnatal care, including education in breast-feeding. 
 
viii. Counsel and support couples in correct choice of contraception. 
 
ix. Interpret test results of laboratory and radiological investigations as they apply to 
the care of the obstetric patient. 
x. Apply medico-legal pri nciples as they apply to tubectomy, Medical Termination 
of Pregnancy (MTP), Pre-conception and Prenatal Diagnostic Techniques (PC 
PNDT Act) and other related Acts. 
xi. Elicit gynecologic history, perform appropriate physical and pelvic examinations 
and PAP smear in the primary care setting. 
xii. Recognize, diagnose and manage c ommon reproductive tract infect ions in the 
primary care setting. 
xiii. Recognize and diagnose common genital cancers and refer them appropriately.

25 
 
17. ORTHOPAEDICS 
 
Subject Goals: 
 
At the end of training in orthopedics, the learner should be able to: 
 
i. Demonstrate ability to recognize and assess bone injuries, dislocation and poly- 
trauma and provide first contact care prior to appropriate referral. 
ii. Recognize and manage common infections of bone and joints in the primary care 
setting. 
iii. Recognize common congenital. metabolic, neoplastic, degenerative and 
inflammatory bone diseases, treat and refer appropriately. 
iv. Perform simple orthopedic techniques as applicable to a primary care setting. 
 
v. Recommend rehabilitative services for common orthopedic problems across all ages. 
 
vi. Demonstrate knowledge about the medico-legal aspects of trauma. 
 
 
18. ANAESTHESIOLOGY 
 
Subject Goals: 
At the end of training in anesthesiology, the learner should be able to: 
 
i. Explain principles of administration of general, regional and local anaesthesia 
including selection of cases, pre-operative evaluation, optimisation and recovery. 
ii. Comprehend management of acute and chronic pain including labour analgesiaClear and maintain 
airway in an unconscious patient. 
 
iii. Explain principles of oxygen therapy, select oxygen delivery devices and administer 
oxygen therapy judiciously. 
iv. Perform cardiopulmonary resuscitation with available resources and transfer the 
patient to higher centre for advanced life support. 
v. Comprehend the implications and obtain informed consent for various procedures 
and maintain the documents.

26 
19. RADIODIAGNOSIS 
 
Subject Goals: 
At the end of training in Radiodiagnosis, the learner should be able to: 
 
i. Make rational choice of imaging modality and imaging procedure for common 
diseases 
ii. Exhibit mindful behaviour regarding risks associated with imaging modalities 
 
iii. Exhibit appropriate interdisciplinary conduct and documentation 
 
iv. Interpretation of images of  normal x-rays, abnormalities in x-rays involving 
emergency conditions and diseases that would be treated by the primary care 
physician. 
PHASE WISE TRAINING AND TIME DISTRIBUTION FOR PROFESSIONAL 
DEVELOPMENT 
Subject wise competencies published in Competency Based Undergraduate 
Curriculum 2024 on NMC website and Attitude, Ethics and Communi cation 
(AETCOM) course available on the NMC website, shall be the curriculum for the 
batches admitted in MBBS from the academic year 2024-25 onwards . Teaching 
learning and assessment may be carried out using bilingual mode (Assamese, 
Bangla, Gujarati, Hindi, Kannada, Malayalam, Marathi, Odiya, Pu njabi, 
Tamil, and Telugu) along with English language.

27 
In order to ensure that training is in alignment with the goals  and 
competencies required for a medical graduate, there shall be a Foundation 
Course to orient medical learners to MBBS programme, and provide them wit h 
requisite knowledge, communicati on (including electronic), tech nical and 
language skills. 
I. Training period and time distribution: 
Universities shall organize admission timing and admission process in such a way 
that teaching in the phase I commences with induction through t he Foundation 
Course at the beginning of academic year. There shall be no admission of students 
in respect of any academic session beyond dates specified for each academic year. 
The Universities/ Institutions/colleges shall not register any student (in 
MBBS course) admitted beyond the said date. Any student identified as having 
obtained admission after the last date for closure of admission shall be discharged 
from the course of study, or any medical qualification granted to such a student 
shall not be a recognized qualification by National Medical Commission. 
The institution which grants admission to any student after the last date specified 
from the same shall also be lia ble to face such action as may b e prescribed by 
National Medical Commission. 
Every learner shall undergo a period of certified study extendi ng over 4 ½ 
academic years, divided into four professional years from the d ate of 
commencement of course to the da te of completion of examination  which shall 
be followed by one year of compulsory rotating medical internship. 
Each academic year will have at least 39 teaching weeks with a minimum of 
39 hours a week. 
Large group teaching shall not exceed one third of the total al lotted hours for 
a subject. Two third of the tota l allotted hours shall include small group 
teaching, interactive sessions, practicals, clinical, small gro up teaching, self- 
directed learning and tutorials etc. The learning process shall  include clinical 
experiences, problem- oriented a pproach, case studies and commu nity health 
care activities.

28 
Learner centered teaching learning methods shall include early clinical 
exposure, problem/case-based le arning, case studies, community- oriented 
learning, self-directed, integrat ed learning, experiential lear ning & electives. 
Teaching and learning shall be a ligned and integrated across sp ecialties both 
vertically and horizontally for better learner comprehension. 
At the end of each professional year university examination will be conducted. If 
any student fails to clear the r egular university examination, student will appear 
in supplementary examination. 
Supplementary examinations and declaration of resul ts shall be processed by 
universities within 6-8 weeks fro m the date of declaration of t he results of the 
main examination for every professional year, so that the candi dates, who pass, 
can join the main batch for progression. 
If the student fails in the suppl ementary examination in phase 1 of MBBS, the 
student goes to the junior batc h for teaching learning as well as for university 
examinations. There shall be no supplementary batches. If a can didate has not 
appeared for university examination (both theory and practical) for a subject then 
it shall not be counted as an att empt for that subject. Partial  attendance in 
examination (only theory or only practical) in any subject shall be counted as an 
attempt. No more than four attempts shall be allowed for a candidate to pass the 
Phase 1 examination. The total period for successful completion of phase I course 
shall not exceed four (4) years. A learner shall not be entitle d to graduate later 
than ten (10) years of her/his joining the first MBBS course (i ncluding 
continuous rotatory medical internship). 
Phase wise details are: 
• A candidate, who fails in the Phase-I examination, shall not be allowed to 
join the Phase-II until the candidate passes all subjects of Ph ase-I 
examination.  
• A candidate who fails in the Phase-II regular/ supplementary un iversity 
examination, shall be allowed to j oin the Phase-III Part I trai ning, however he 
shall not be allowed appear for the university examination.

29 
• A candidate who fails in the Phase III, Part-I regular/suppleme ntary  
university examination, shall be allowed to join the Phase-III Part II 
training, however he shall not be allowed appear for the university examination.  
 
II. The period of 4½ years is divided as follows: 
i) Phase-I of 12 months including F oundation Course of two weeks a nd 
university exams. It shall consist of - Anatomy, Physiology, Biochemistry, 
Introduction to Community Medicin e, Humanities, Attitude, Ethic s & 
Communication (AETCOM) module, f amily adoption programme throug h village 
outreach where-in each student s hall adopt minimum of three (03 ) families and 
preferably at least five (05) fam ilies, simulation-based learni ng, early clinical 
exposure, alignment & integration and pandemic module integrated. 
ii) Phase-II of 12 months including university exams. It will consist of Pathology, 
Pharmacology, Microbiology, family  visit under Community Medici ne, General 
Surgery, General Medicine, Obstetrics & Gynecology, AETCOM module, Forensic 
Medicine & Toxicology, alignmen t & integration and introduction  to clinical 
subjects. Family Adoption Progra mme through village outreach wh ere-in each 
student shall continue to follow  up and provide necessary servi ces under the 
supervision. Pandemic module inte gration & simulation-based lea rning to be 
continued with increasing complexity. 
The clinical exposure to learner s will be in the form of learne r-doctor method of 
clinical training in all phases.  The emphasis will be on primar y, preventive and 
comprehensive health care. A part of training during clinical p ostings shall take 
place at the primary level of health care. It is desirable to provide learning 
experiences in secondary health care, wherever possible. This w ill involve: 
Experience in recognizing and managing common problems seen in outpatient, 
inpatient and emergency settings, 
• Involvement in patient care as a team member, 
 
• Involvement in patient management and performance of basic procedures.

30 
 
iii) Phase III - 30 months 
 
a. Phase III Part I (12 months, including University exams) 
 
Forensic Medicine and Toxicolog y, Community Medicine, Medicine & allied 
subjects, Ophthalmology, Otorhinolaryngology (ENT), Surgery & a llied subjects, 
Pediatrics, Obstetrics& Gyneco logy, Radiodiagnosis, Anesthesiol ogy, AETCOM, 
Pandemic module integration, alignment & integration and Clinical postings. Family 
Adoption Programme through village outreach and simulation- based learning to be 
continued with increasing complexity. 
Electives (1 month) shall be in 2 blocks of 15 days each in Pha se III part II. First 
15days block starts after annual exam of Phase III MBBS part 1 and 2nd block after 
the end of 1st elective. 
b. Phase 3 Part II (18 months, including University exam)- 
 
Subjects include: 
Medicine and allied specialties (General Medicine, Psychiatry, Dermatology, 
Venereology and Leprosy (DVL), S urgery and allied specialties ( General Surgery, 
Orthopedics, Anesthesiology and Radiodiagnosis), Obstetrics and  Gynecology 
(including Family Welfare), Ped iatrics, AETCOM module, Pandemic  module 
integration, alignment & integration and Clinical postings. 
 
Ill. Distribution of teaching hours phase wise: 
a Phase I, phase II and phase III- part 1 teaching hours: 
Time allotted 12 months (approximately 52 weeks) out of which time available 
for teaching- learning: approximately 39 weeks.

31 
(Excluded- 13 weeks: Preliminary/ University examinations and results: 9 
weeks, vacations: 2 weeks, public holidays: 2 weeks) 
Time distribution in weeks: 39 weeks x 39 hours = 1521 hours for Teaching- 
Learning. 
b Phase-III Part-II, teaching hours: 
Time allotted: 18 months (approx. 78 weeks) 
Time available: Approx. 62 weeks (excluding 16 weeks) (39 hours/ week) 
Prelim / University Exam & Results: 10 weeks 
Vacation: 3 weeks 
Public Holidays: 3 weeks 
Time distribution in weeks: 62 x 39 hrs= 2418 hrs available for Teaching- 
Learning 
(Clinical Postings: 15 hours/ week Phase II onwards included in academic schedule. 
These are attached in separate annexure with all relevant tables). 
● Academic calendar is given in annexure. 
● Distribution of subjects for Professional Phase-wise training is given in 
annexure 
● Minimum teaching hours prescribed in various disciplines phase wise are 
given in annexures. 
● Distribution and duration of clinical postings is given in annexure. 
Time allotted excludes time reserved for internal /University e xaminations, and 
vacation. 
Phase II clinical postings shall commence before / after declaration of results of the 
first professional phase examinations, as decided by the institution/ University. 
Phase III part I and part II clinical postings shall start no later than two weeks after 
the completion of the previous professional examination. 
Note: 
A total of approximately 20% of allotted time of a Phase shall be utilized for integrated 
teaching learning with other subjects. This will be included in the assessment of subjects.

32 
The period of training is minimum suggested. Adjustments where required depending on 
availability of time may be made by the concerned college/ inst itution. This period of 
training does not include univers ity examination period. Pandem ic module teaching 
hours are added to respective allocated subjects and these subj ects will teach as per 
module. 
An exposure to skills lab based teaching by each subject in eac h phase shall be there 
weekly or fortnightly. 
c New teaching /learning elements (Refer to booklets on NMC website related to 
these elements) 
1) Foundation Course 
Goal: The goal of the Foundation Course is to prepare a learner to study 
medicine effectively. 
Objectives: 
(a) Orient the learner to: 
 
• The medical profession and the physician's role in society 
• The MBBS programme 
 
• Alternate health systems i.e. AYUSH in India and history of Medicine 
• Medical ethics, attitudes and professionalism 
• Health care system, its delivery and visits to health centers 
 
• National health programmes and policies 
 
• Universal precautions and vaccinations 
 
• Patient safety and biohazard safety 
 
• Principles of primary care(general and community based care) 
• Mental Health 
 
• The academic ambience

33 
(b) Enable the learner to acquire enhanced skills in: 
 
• Language 
• Interpersonal relationships 
• Communication emphasis on clinico-laboratory communication 
• Learning including self-directed learning 
• Time management 
• Stress management, Mental Health 
• Use of information technology, and artificial intelligence 
 
(c) Train the learner to provide: 
 
• First-aid 
• Basic /cardiopulmonary/emergency life support 
 
In addition to the above, learners maybe enrolled in one of the following programmes 
which will be run concurrently: 
• Local language programme 
• English language programme 
• Computer skills 
 
These may be done in the last two hours of the day. These sessi ons must be as 
interactive as possible. Sports (to be used through the Foundation Course as protected 
04 hours/week). Leisure and extracurricular activity (to be used through the Foundation 
Course). 
Institutions shall develop learning modules and identify the ap propriate resource 
persons for their delivery. The time committed for the Foundation Course may not be 
used for any other curricular activity. The Foundation Course shall have a minimum of 
75% attendance of all students mandatorily. This will be certified by the Principal/Dean 
of the college. 
The Foundation Course shall be organized by the Coordinator appointed by the Principal/ 
Dean of the college and shall be under supervision of the Heads of MBBS phase 
1departments.

34 
Every college shall arrange for a meeting with parents/ wards o f all students and 
records of the same shall be m ade available to UGMEB of NMC. Me ntor- mentee 
program shall be carried out judiciously, with the ratio of 1 M entor to 3 mentees. 
M e n t o r  m a y  b e  s e l e c t e d  f r o m  a l l  d i s c i p l i n e s  f r o m  t h e  l e v e l  o f  Professor/ HOD to 
Assistant Professor. Mentor shall be allotted his mentees during the foundation course 
itself from Phase 1. The mentee shall stay connected with the Mentor throughout his 
career till he completes CRMI. Each year when 3 new mentees are added from phase 
1 to the mentor, the senior batch students shall support the junior students and create 
a healthy sibling environment. 
2) Early Clinical Exposure 
 
Objectives: The objectives of early clinical exposure of the first-year medical learners 
are to enable the learner to: 
 Recognize the relevance of sciences basic to diagnosis, patient care and 
management, 
 Provide a context that will enhance learning of sciences basic to clinical 
reasoning, 
 Relate to experience of patients as a motivation to learn, 
 Recognize attitude, ethics and professionalism as integral to doctor- Patient 
relationship, 
 Understand the socio-cultural context of disease through the study of humanities. 
 
Elements 
 
• Phase I subject correlation: i.e. apply and correlate principles of phase I subjects as 
they relate to patient care (this shall be part of integrated m odules as well as in 
routine teaching wherever relevant). 
• Clinical skills: to include basic skills in interviewing patien ts, doctor- patient 
communication, ethics and professionalism, critical thinking and analysis and self- 
learning (this training shall be imparted in the time allotted for early clinical 
exposure).

35 
• Humanities: to introduce learners to a broader understanding of the socio-economic 
framework and cultural context within which health is delivered through the study 
of humanities and social sciences. 
3) Electives 
Objectives: To provide the learner with opportunities: 
 
 For diverse learning experiences. 
 It is mandatory for learners to do an elective. The elective ti me shall not be used 
to make up for missed clinical postings, shortage of attendance or other purposes. 
 Institutions will pre-determine the number and nature of electi ves, names of the 
supervisors, and the number of learners in each elective based on the local 
conditions, available resources and faculty. 
 Electives on topics in areas such as Research methodology, Research ethics, Use 
of Artificial intelligence and computers in Health and Medical Education, Health 
Management, Health economics, Indi an system of medicine, Medica l 
photography /clinical photography, Global health, Evidence base d medicine, Art 
and music, Physiotherapy, Nutrition, ethical use of technology including artificial 
intelligence etc. in medicine, Literary activities, etc. may be  provided by the 
college/ institution. 
 It shall be preferable that elective choices are made available  to the learners in the 
beginning of the academic year. 
 The learner must submit a learning log book based on both blocks of the electives. 
 75% attendance in the electives and submission of log book main tained during 
electives is required for eligibility to appear in the University MBBS examination/ 
(or NExT whenever it is applicable). 
4) Attitude, Ethics and Communication Module (AETCOM) 
Objectives of the programme: At the end of the programme, the learner must 
demonstrate ability to:

36 
• Understand and apply principles of bioethics and law as they apply to medical practice 
and research, understand and apply the principles of clinical reasoning as they apply to 
the care of the patients, 
 
• Understand and apply the principles of system-based care as they relate to the care 
of the patient, 
• Understand and apply empathy and other human values to the care of the patient, 
 
• Communicate effectively with patients, families, colleagues and other health care 
professionals, 
• Understand the strengths and limitations of alternative systems of medicine, 
 
• Respond to events and issues in a professional, considerate and humane fashion, 
 
• Translate learning from the humanities in order to further his professional 
and personal growth. 
Learning experiences: 
• This will be a longitudinal programme spread across the continu um of the 
MBBS programme including internship. 
• Learning experiences shall include small group discussions, pat ient care scenarios, 
self-directed learning, workshops , seminars, role plays, large/ small group teaching 
etc. 
• Application based subject oriented cases may be used as additional resources for this 
training and real-life case studies are the best examples for t his AETCOM training. 
Community based case studies mus t be used in communication aspe cts of health 
education, informed consent and counseling in addition to clinical case studies. 
• Attitude, Ethics & Communication Module (AETCOM module) develop ed by the 
erstwhile Medical Council of Indi a should be used longitudinall y for purposes of 
instruction. 
• 75% attendance in AETCOM Module is mandatory for eligibility to  appear for all

37 
university examinations of all subjects in each Phase. 
(5) Alignment and integration (AIT) teaching 
 
Integration is a learning experience that allows the learner to perceive relationships 
from blocks of knowledge and develop a unified view of its basis and its application. 
Objectives 
 
In the earlier phases, the purpos e of vertical integration (acr oss phases) is to 
emphasize the applicative use of the basic science concept taught. In the later phases, 
its purpose is to utilise and build on prior knowledge and emphasize the foundations 
of clinical practice. 
Learning experiences 
 
In order to achieve this, the MBBS curriculum will become - 
 
a) aligned to the extent possible - meaning that as much as possib le topics/systems 
in different subjects in the sam e phase will be grouped togethe r  i n  t h e  s a m e  
weeks/months in timetable for teaching learning. The purpose of  horizontal 
integration (within a phase) is to remove redundancy and provid e 
interconnectedness. Suggested form ats for alignment in phase 1 & 2 aregiven in 
annexures. Phase 3 part 1 and 2 can be aligned accordingly as needed. 
b) integrated to a limited extent both vertically and horizontally. 
 
Integration must be horizontal (i.e. across disciplines in a gi ven phase of the 
course) and vertical (across different phases of the course). Teaching/learning 
occurs in each phase through study of organ systems or disease blocks in order 
to integrate the learning proce ss. Clinical linker cases must b e used to 
integrate and link learning across subjects. 
The six integrated modules to be used across 4 years ½ are anemia, ischemic 
heart disease, diabetes mellitus , tuberculosis, hypertension an d thyroid. The 
complete modules are part of documents on NMC website.

38 
(6) Learner-doctor method of clinical training (Clinical Clerkship) 
 
a. Goal: To provide learners with experience in: 
 
o Longitudinal patient care, 
 
o Being part of the health care team, 
o Hands-on care of patients in outpatient and in-patient setting. 
b. Structure: 
 
o The first clinical posting in Phase II shall orient learners to the 
patient, their roles and the specialty. 
o The learner-doctor programme shall progress as outlined in Table 9. 
o The learner shall function as a part of the health care team with the 
following responsibilities: 
o Be a part of the units' out-patient services on admission days, 
o Remain with the admission unit until at least 6 PM except durin g 
designated class hours, 
o Be assigned patients admitted during each admission day for who m he 
will undertake responsibility, unde r the supervision of a senio r resident 
or faculty member, 
o Participate in the unit rounds on its admission day and will pr esent the 
assigned patients to the supervising physician, 
o Follow the patient's progress throughout the hospital stay until discharge, 
o Participate, under supervision, in procedures, surgeries, deliveries etc. of 
assigned patients, 
o Participate in unit rounds on at least one other day of the week excluding 
the admission day, 
o Discuss ethical and other humanitarian issues during unit rounds, 
o Attend all scheduled classes and educational activities, 
o Document his observations in a prescribed log book /case record.

39 
 
 
 
 
 
 
No learner will be given independent charge of the patient in the capacity of 
primary physician of the concerned patient. 
The supervising physician shall be responsible for all patient care decisions and 
guide the learner from time to time as required. 
(7) Assessment: 
o A designated faculty member in each unit will coordinate and fa cilitate the 
activities of the learner, monitor progress, provide feedback and review the log 
book/ case record. 
o The log book/ case record must in clude the written case record prepared by the 
learner including relevant inves tigations, treatment and its ra tionale, hospital 
course, family and patient discussions, discharge summary etc. 
o The log book shall also include r ecords of outpatients assigned. Submission of 
the log book/ case record to the department is required for eli gibility to appear 
for the final examination of the subject. An e-logbook is desirable. 
 
Assessment 
 
I. Eligibility to appear for Professional examinations 
 
The performance in essential components of training are to be assessed, based on 
following three components: 
(a) Attendance 
o There shall be a minimum of 75% attendance in theory and 80% 
attendance in practical /clinic al for eligibility to appear for  the 
examinations in that subject. In subjects that are taught in more than 
one phase - the learner must have 75% attendance in theory and 80% 
attendance in practical in each phase of instruction in that su bject. 
There shall be a minimum of 75% attendance in AETCOM and 
minimum of 80% attendance in family visits under Family adoption

40 
programme. Each student sha ll adopt minimum 3 families/ 
households and preferably five families. The details shall be as per 
Family Adoption Program guidelines. 
o If an examination comprises more than one subject (for e.g., 
General Surgery and allied branch es), the candidate must have a  
minimum of 75% attendance in eac h subject including its allied 
branches, and 80% attendance in each clinical posting. 
Learners who do not have at least 75% attendance in the electives will not be 
eligible for the Third Professional - Part II examination/ NExT. 
b) Internal Assessment (IA): Internal assessment shall be based on day-to-day 
assessment. For subjects taught in more than one phase, there shall be IA in every 
 phase in which the subject is taught.  
It shall relate to different ways in which learners participate in the learning 
process including assignments, preparation for seminar, clinical case 
presentation, preparation of clinical case for discussion, clinical case study/ 
problem solving exercise, participation in project for health care in the community, 
Quiz, Certification of competencies, museum study, log books, SDL skills etc. 
Internal assessment should have both subjective and objective assessment. Internal 
assessment shall not be added to summative assessment. However, internal 
assessment marks in absolute marks should be displayed under a separate column 
in a detailed marks card.  
The internal assessment marks for each subject will be out of 100 for theory and 
out of 100 for practical/clinical (except in General Medicine, General Surgery 
and Obstetrics & Gynaecology, in which theory and practical assessment will be 
of 200 marks each). 
For subjects that teach in more  than one phase, cumulative IA t o be used as 
eligibility criteria. The final cumulative marks are to be used  for eligibility. 
The details are: 
I. General medicine: The IA of 200 ma rks in medicine shall be divi ded across 
phases as Phase II   - 50 marks, 
Phase III part 1 - 50 marks

41 
Phase III part 2 - 100 marks. 
Phase III part 2 - 100 marks is divided as 
Medicine  - 75 marks 
Psychiatry - 13 marks 
Dermatology- 12 marks. 
The final cumulative IA for Medicine is out of 200 marks for th eory and 
practical each. 
II. General surgery: The IA in surgery shall be divided across phases as: 
Phase II - 25 marks, 
Phase III part 1 - 25 marks, 
Phase III part 2 - 150 marks. 
Phase III part 2 - 150 marks shall be divided as 
General surgery  - 75 marks, 
Orthopedics -50 marks, 
Anesthesia -13 marks 
Radiodiagnosis  - 12 marks. 
The final cumulative IA for surgery is out of 200 marks for the ory and 
practical each. 
III. IA of Forensic Medicine and Toxi cology is divided as 25 marks i n phase II 
and 75 marks in Phase III part 1. The final cumulative IA is ou t of 100 for 
theory and practical each. 
IV. IA in Community Medicine is divided as 25 marks in phase I, 25 marks in 
phase II, and 50 marks in Phase III- part 1. The final cumulati ve IA for 
Community Medicine is out of 100 marks for theory and practical each. 
V. IA in ophthalmology and ENT is divided as 25 marks in phase II and 75 marks 
in Phase III part 1. The final cu mulative IA is out of 100 for theory and 
practical each for each subject. 
 
(b) Certifiable Competencies  Achieved: 
1. Learners must have completed the  required certifiable competenc ies 
for that phase of training and completed the log book appropria te for 
that phase of training to be eligible for appearing at the final university

42 
examination of that subject. 
2. Regular periodic examinations shall be conducted throughout the  course. 
There shall be no less than thr ee theory and practical internal  assessment 
examinations in each subject of phase 1 &II, and this mandatorily includes 
pre-university examination. There shall be no less than two the ory and 
clinical examinations in each s ubject of Phase III part 1 & 2 a nd this 
mandatorily includes an end of posting assessment. Log book (in cluding 
required skill certifications) to  be assessed and marks given f rom 10-20% 
in internal assessment. 
3. Learners must secure at least 50% of the total marks (combined in theory 
and practical / clinical; and minimum 40% in theory and practic al 
separately) for internal assessment in a particular subject in order to be 
eligible for appearing at the final University examination of that subject. 
4. The results of internal assess ment should be intimated to stude nts at least 
once in 3 months and as and when a student wants to see the results. 
 
Remedial measures: 
 
A student whose has deficiency(s) in any of the 3 criteria that are required to be eligible to 
appear in university examination, should be put into remedial process as below: 
o During the course: If Internal assessment (IA) or attendance is less or/and 
certifiable competencies not a chieved and marked in log book in  quarterly/ six 
monthly monitoring, the students/parents must be intimated about the possibility of 
being detained much before the f inal university examination, so  that there is 
sufficient time for remedial measures. These students should be provided remedial 
measures as and when needed to improve IA. Any certifiable competency/ IA marks 
deficiency should be attended with planned teaching/tests for them. Student should 
complete the remedial measures and it should be documented. In spite of all above 
measures, if student is still not meeting the criteria to be el igible for regular 
exam he shall be offered remedial for the same batch supplementary exam. For 
attendance, he will be allowed remedial measures ONLY IF attendance is more 
than 60% for each component.

43 
At the end of phase: If Internal assessment (IA) or  attendance is less or/and 
certifiable competencies not achieved and marked in log book at the end of regular 
classes in a phase, the student i s detained to appear in regula r university 
examination of that batch.  
o Remedial classes can be planned for students missing regular classes on genuine 
grounds, thus ensuring that all certifiable competencies are achieved.  
o Students who have less than 75% a ttendance in theory and 80% at tendance in 
practical cannot appear for University examination, however; they may appear for 
Supplementary examination provide d they attend the remedial cla sses organised 
between University Sit and Supplem entary exam. Students who hav e attendance 
60% or above shall be eligible for such remedial classes. 
2.University Examinations: University examinations are t o be designed with a view 
to ascertain whether the candidate has acquired the necessary knowledge, minimal level 
of skills, ethical and professional values with clear concepts of the fundamentals which 
are necessary for him to function effectively and appropriately as a physician of the first 
contact. 
Nature of questions in theory e xaminations shall include differ ent types such as 
structured essays like Long-Answer Questions (LAQ), Short-Answe r Questions 
(SAQ) and Multiple-Choice Questi o n s  ( M C Q )  s h a l l  b e  a c c o r d e d  m i nimum 20% 
weightage of the total marks of each theory paper, Scenario bas ed MCQs shall be 
accorded more weightage in view of NEXT. Blueprint may be used for theory 
question papers. 
Practical/clinical examinations shall be conducted in the labor atories and /or hospital 
wards and a blueprint must be used. The objective will be to assess proficiency and skills 
to conduct experiments, interpret data and form logical conclus ion. Clinical cases kept 
in the examination must be comm on conditions that the learner m ay encounter as a 
physician of first contact in the community. Selection of rare syndromes and disorders 
as examination cases is to be discouraged. Emphasis should be on candidate's capability 
to elicit history, demonstrate physical signs, write a case rec ord, analyze the case and

44 
develop a management plan. 
                        Viva/oral examination should assess approach to patient management, emergencies 
                       and attitudinal, ethical and professional values. Candidate's skill in interpretation of 
                       common investigative data like X-rays, identification of specimens, ECG, etc. is to be 
                       also assessed. 
Application based questions shoul d be included for newer CBME c omponents like 
foundation course, ECE, AETCOM, I ntegrated topics, student-lear ner methods etc. 
in all theory, practical and clin ical examinations of all inter nal assessments and university 
assessments. 
University Examinations shall be held as under: 
 
a) Phase-I shall be held at the end of Phase I training (in the 12th month of that 
training), in the subjects of Anatomy, Physiology and Biochemistry. 
b) Phase-II examination shall be held at the end of Phase II training (12th month of that 
training), in the subjects of Pathology, Microbiology, and Pharmacology 
c) Phase III Part 1examination shall be held at the end of Phase III part 1 of tra ining 
(12th month of that training) in the subjects of Community Medicine,  F o r e n s i c  
Medicine &Toxicology, Ophthalmology and Otorhinolaryngology. 
d) Phase III Part 2 / National Exit Test (NExT) as per NExT regulations- (Final 
Professional) examination shall be at the end of 17th / 18th month of that training, in 
the subjects of General Medicine , General Surgery, Obstetrics &  Gynecology, 
Pediatrics, and allied subjects as per NExT Regulations. 
Criteria for passing in a subject: A candidate shall obtain a cumulative 50% marks in 
University conducted examination including theory and practical  and not less than 40% 
separately in Theory and in Practical in order to be declared a s passed in that subject. In 
subjects that have two papers, the learner must secure a minimu m 40% marks in 
aggregate (both theory papers together).

45 
 
Appointment of Examiners: 
 
(1) Person appointed as an examiner in the particular subject must have at least three 
years of total teaching experien ce as Assistant Professor after  obtaining postgraduate 
degree following MBBS, in the concerned subject in a college affiliated to a recognized 
medical college (by UGMEB of NMC). 
(2) For Practical /Clinical examinations, there shall be at least four examiners for every 
learner, out of whom not less than 50% must be external examine rs. Of the four 
examiners, the senior-most internal examiner shall act as the C hairman and coordinator 
of the whole examination programme  so that uniformity in the ma tter of assessment of 
candidates is maintained. 
(3) A University having more than one  college shall have separate s ets of examiners for 
each college, with internal examiners from the concerned college. External examiners may 
be from outside the college/ university/ state/ union territory. 
(4) There shall be a Chairman of the  Board of paper-setters who sha ll be an internal 
examiner and shall mandatorily moderate the theory question paper(s). 
(5) All eligible examiners with re quisite qualifications and experi ence can be appointed 
internal examiners by rotation in their subjects. 
(6) All theory paper assessment should be done as a central assessment program (CAP) of 
the concerned university. 
(7) Internal examiners shall be appointed from the same institution  for unitary 
examination in the same institution. For pooled examinations at one centre, the approved 
internal examiners from the same university may be appointed. 
(8) The Examiners for General Surgery and allied subjects shall be from General Surgery 
and 25% from orthopedics. There shall be one orthopedics examiner out of four examiners 
(either internal or external). 
(9) Ophthalmology and ENT examinations to be held as separate exami nations and not 
combined with other subjects. 
(10) There shall be NO grace marks to be considered for passing in an examination.

46 
 
 
ANNEXURES: 
1. AETCOM module curricular governance and blueprinting 
2. Academic calendar 
3. Phase wise distribution of subjects 
4. Foundation course hours distribution 
5. Distribution of hours phase wise 
6. Clinical postings distribution 
7. Learner doctor (Clinical Clerkship) method 
8. University examination marks 
9. Sample format of paper theory with marks distribution 
10. Alignment Phase I 
11. Alignment Phase II 
12. Family adoption programme 
13. Guidelines for manpower requirement for research facilities

47 
Annexure 1 
AETCOM Modules teaching and assessment 
 
The tables below show the suggest ed AETCOM blueprinting for var ious university papers and for 
module leader/in-charge for coord inating Module teaching. Each module leader/in-charge should 
select a multi-subject team a nd then the module is taught by va rious members of the team. The 
module teaching learning activities should be planned and conducted by this team. 
Assessment: All internal and Univ ersity exams must have one que stion/application based question 
on AETCOM in each theory paper (5%) and it should be assessed i n various components of 
practical/clinical exams. 
AETCOM Phase 1 
Subject Paper Module number
Anatomy Paper 1 1.5 
Paper 2 1.4  Foundations of communications 
Physiology Paper 1 1.2 
Paper 2 1 . 3
Biochemistry Paper 1 1.1 
● Enumerate and describe professional qualities and 
roles of a physician 
● Describe and discuss commitment to lifelong learning 
as an important part of physician growth 
Paper 2 1.1 
● Describe and discuss the role of a physician in 
health care system 
● Identify and discuss physician’s role and 
responsibility to society and the community that 
she/ he serves 
 
AETCOM Phase 2 
Subject Paper Module number 
Microbiology Paper 1 2.1 
Paper 2 2.8 
Pharmacology Paper 1 2.2, 2.3 
Paper 2 2.5 
Pathology Paper 1 2.4 
Paper 2 2.7

48 
AETCOM Phase 3, part I 
Subject Paper Module number 
Ophthalmology Single paper 3.1 
ENT Single paper 3.3 
Forensic Medicine & 
Toxicology 
Single paper 2.6, 3.4  
Community 
Medicine 
Paper 1 3.2
Paper 2 3.5 
 
 
 
 
AETCOM Phase 3, part 2 
Subject Competency 
Number 
Competency 
Medicine and 
Allied Subjects, 
integration 
Paper 1 4.1
Paper 2 4.3 
Surgery and 
Allied 
Subjects, 
Paper 1 4.4 
Paper 2 4.5, 4.6 
Obstetrics and 
Gynecology 
Paper 1 4.2, 4.7 
Paper 2 4.8 
Pediatrics Single paper 4.9

49 
Annexure 2 Time distribution of MBBS Teaching & Examination Schedule 
 
Academic calendar foradmission batch 2024-2025
 JAN FEB MAR APR MAY JUN JUL AUG SEP OCT NOV DEC 
Adm year          1 
14 
Oct 
2 3 
Phase 1 
exam 
4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12
Phase 
1 
exam, 
result 
13 
Phase 
2 
starts 
14 15 
Phase 2 
exam 
16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 
Phase 
2 
exam, 
result 
25 
Phase 
3 part 
1 
starts 
26 27 
Phase 3 
part I 
exam 
28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35 36
Phase 
3 Part 
1 
exam, 
result 
37 
Phase 
3 part 
2 
starts 
38 39 
 40 41 42 43 44 45 46 47 48 49 50 51 
Phase 3 
part II 
exam 
52 53 54 
Proposed 
NExT 
step1 
1 
CRMI
2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 
Internship 10 11 12 
Proposed 
NExT 
step2 
         
 
 
 
Legends: 
CRMI-Compulsory rotating medical internship

50 
Proposed time distribution of MBBS Teaching & Examination Schedule from A.Y. 2025-‘26 
 
 
Generic proposed academic calendar from admission batch 2025-2026 onwards 
 JAN FEB MAR APR MAY JUN JUL AUG SEP OCT NOV DEC 
Adm year         1 2 3 4
Phase 1 
exam 
5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 
Phase 
1 
exam, 
result 
13 
Phase 
2 
starts 
14 15 16 
Phase 2 
exam 
17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 
Phase 
2 
exam, 
result 
25 
Phase 
3 part 
1 
starts 
26 27 28 
Phase 3 
part I 
exam 
29 30 31 32 33 34 35 36 
Phase 
3 Part 
1 
exam, 
result 
37 
Phase 
3 part 
2 
starts 
38 39 40 
 41 42 43 44 45 46 47 48 49 50 51 52
Phase 3 
part II 
exam 
53 54 
Proposed 
NExT 
step1 
1 
CRMI 
2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 
Internship 11 12 
Proposed 
NExT 
step2 
          
Legends: 
CRMI-Compulsory rotating medical internship

51 
Annexure 3 
Distribution of subjects in each Professional Phase 
 
 
Phase & 
year of 
MBBS 
training 
Subjects & Teaching Elements Durati
on 
(month
s) 
University 
Examination
Phase-1 1.  Foundation course of 2 weeks at start of 
course 
2. Anatomy, Physiology & Biochemistry, 
Introduction to Community Medicine, 
including Family adoption programme 
(FAP) through village outreach 
3. Early Clinical Exposure 
4.  Attitude, Ethics, and communication Module 
(AETCOM) including Humanities 
 
 
12 
months 
 
Phase 1 
Phase-2 1. Pathology, Microbiology, Pharmacology 
2. Community Medicine (including FAP) 
3. Forensic Medicine and Toxicology 
4. Introduction to clinical subjects 
5. Clinical postings, Family visits for FAP 
6. AETCOM
 
 
12 
months 
 
Phase 2 
Phase- 3, 
Part-I  
1. Community Medicine, Forensic Medicine 
and Toxicology, Medicine & allied, 
Surgery & allied, Pediatrics, Obstetrics & 
Gynecology 
2. Family visits for FAP 
3. Oto-rhinolaryngology, 
4. Ophthalmology 
5. Clinical postings 
6. AETCOM 
 
 
12 
months 
 
 
Phase 3, 
 Part 1 
Electives  2 blocks, 15 days each (after the annual exams 
are over, irrespective of result outcome) 
 
1 
month 
Phase 3, 
Part II 
Phase-3, 
Part- II, 
MBBS 
1. General Medicine, Dermatology, 
Psychiatry, Pediatrics, General                                
Surgery, Orthopedics, Radiodiagnosis, 
Anesthesiology, Obstetrics & 
Gynecology 
2. Clinical postings 
3. AETCOM 
 18 months 
(including 
electives) 
Phase 3, 
Part II

52 
Annexure 4 
Foundation Course- 2 weeks at start of course 
 
Subjects/Contents Teaching 
hours 
Orientation Module including History of Indian Medicine 15 
Skills Module 15 
Community orientation module 5 
Professional Development and Ethics Module (P&E) including 
Mental health 
20 
Enhancement of Language and Computer Skills Module including 
clinico-laboratory communication 
10 
Sports and Extra curricular Activities 15 
Total 80

53 
Annexure 5 
Distribution of Subject Wise Teaching Hours for Phase -1 MBBS 
 
 
 
 
Subject Large 
group 
teaching 
SGT/ 
Practical/ 
Tutorials/ 
Seminars 
SDL Total 
Foundation Course    80 
Anatomy 180 430 10 620 
Physiology 130 305 10 445 
Biochemistry * 82 157 10 249 
Early Clinical Exposure 
(ECE)** 
- 27 - 27 
Community Medicine 20 20 - 40 
Family adoption Program 
(FAP) 
- 24 - 24 
(AETCOM)*** - 26 - 26 
Sports and extra-curricular 
Activities 
- - - 10 
Total 412 989 30 1521 
SGT: Small group teaching,  SDL: Self-directed learning 
*Including Molecular Biology 
**Minimum ECE hours. These hours are to be divided equally by anatomy, physiology & 
biochemistry. 
 
***AETCOM module is a longitudinal programme.

54 
Distribution of Subject Wise Teaching Hours for Phase-2 MBBS 
 
Subjects Large 
group 
teaching 
SGT/ 
Practicals/ 
Tutorials/ 
Seminars 
Clinical 
Postings*
SDL Total 
Pathology 80 170 - 10 260
Pharmacology 80 170 - 10 260
           Microbiology 75 143 - 10 228
Community Med         
(including FAP) 
25 0 24 10 59 
Forensic Medicine 
and Toxicology 
12  25 - 08 45 
Clinical Subjects 60  540 - 600
AETCOM - 29 - 8 37 
Sports, Yoga  
extra- 
curricular 
activities 
- - - 32 32 
Final total 332 537 564 88 1521
SGT: Small group teaching  S DL: Self-directed learning 
 
Pl. note: *Clinical postings shall be for 3 hours per day, Monday to Friday. 
There will be 15 hours per week for all clinical postings.

55 
 
 
 
Distribution of Subject Wise Teaching Hours for MBBS Phase-3, part 1 
 
Subject Large 
group 
teaching 
SGT/ 
Practicals/ 
Tutorials/ 
Seminars 
SDL Total 
Electives 0 156 0 156 
Gen. Medicine 20 30 10 60 
Gen Surgery 20 30 10 60 
Obstetrics & Gynecology 20 30 10 60 
Pediatrics 20 30 05 55 
*Forensic Medicine and 
Toxicology 
35 65* 20* 120 
Community Med 50 80 20 150 
FAP (Visits +log book 
submission) 
- 26 10 36 
Otorhinolaryngology (ENT) 30 50 20 100 
Ophthalmology 30 50 20 100 
Clinical posting*    593 
AETCOM 0 19 12 31 
Total      225 566 137 1521 
*Out of this, 21 Hours (07 days x 03 hours) must be utilised for demonstration of post mortem 
examinations 
Pl. note: *Clinical postings shall be for 3 hours per day, Monday to Saturday. 
There will be 18 hours per week for all clinical postings. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
'

56 
Distribution of Subject wise Teaching Hours for Phase 3 part-2 MBBS 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Pl. note: *Clinical postings shall be for 3 hours per day, Monday to Saturday. 
There will be 18 hours per week for all clinical postings. 
Extra hours may be used for preparation of NExT or SDL. 
Subjects Lectures SGL SDL Total
General Medicine 110 185 40 335 
General Surgery 90 153 30 273 
Obstetrics and 
Gynecology 
80 150 30 260 
Pediatrics 20 35 10 65 
Orthopedics 30 50 20 100 
AETCOM 30 0 22 52 
Dermatology, 
Venereology & Leprosy 
13 17 10 40 
Psychiatry 13 17 10 40 
Radiodiagnosis 8 10 8 26
Anesthesiology 8 10 8 26 
Clinical postings*    1201 
TOTAL 402        627 188 2418

57 
Annexure 6 
Clinical Posting Schedules in weeks phase wise 
 
 
 
 
Subjects 
Period of training in weeks Total Weeks 
Phase 
2 
Phase 3, 
Part 1 
Phase 
3,  
Part 2 
Electives 0 4 0 4 
General Medicine 8 3 13 24 
General Surgery 6 5 13 24 
Obstetrics & 
Gynaecology 
6 3 13 22 
Pediatrics 4 2 6 12 
Community Medicine 4 4 0 8 
Orthopaedics 0 2 6 8 
Otorhinolaryngology 4 4 0 8 
Ophthalmology 4 4          0 8 
Psychiatry 0 2 4 6 
Radio-diagnosis 0 0 2 2 
Dermatology, 
Venereology & Leprosy 
0 0 6 6 
Anaesthesiology 0 0 2 2 
Total 36 33 65 134

58 
Annexure 7: Learner- Doctor programme (Clinical Clerkship) 
 
 
Year of 
Curriculum 
 
Focus of Learner-Doctor programme 
Phase-1 Introduction to hospital environment, early clinical exposure, 
understanding perspectives of illness, family adoption program 
Phase-2 History taking, physical examination, assessment of change in clinical 
status, communication and patient education, family adoption program 
Phase-3, 
Part -1 
All of the above and choice of investigations, basic procedures and 
continuity of care 
Phase-3, 
Part -2 
All of the above (except Family adoption programme) and decision 
making, management and outcomes

59 
Annexure 8 
Marks distribution for various subjects for University Annual Examinations 
 
Phase of Course Theory Practicals Passing criteria 
Phase-I MBBS    
Anatomy- 2 papers Paper 1- 100 100  
 Paper 2 -100   
Physiology- 2 papers Paper 1- 100 100 Mandatory to 
 Paper 2 -100  get 40% marks 
Biochemistry- 2 papers Paper 1- 100 100 separately i n 
 Paper 2- 100  theory and in 
Phase-II MBBS   practicals; and 
Pathology - 2 papers Paper 1- 100 100 totally 50% for 
 Paper 2 -100  theory plus 
Microbiology- 2 papers Paper 1- 100 100 practicals. 
 Paper 2- 100   
    
Pharmacology- 2 papers Paper 1 -100 ꞏ100  
 Paper 2- 100   
Phase-III MBBS part 1    
Forensic Medicine and Paper 1 – 100 100  
Toxicology- 1 paper  
Community Med – 
 2 papers 
Paper 1 -100 100  
 Paper 2- 100   
Otorhinolaryngology P a per-1 100 100  
Ophthalmology Paper-1 100 100  
Phase-III MBBS part 2    
Medicine & allied Paper 1- 100 100  
 Paper 2- 100   
Surgery & allied Paper 1- 100 100  
 Paper 2- 100   
Obstetrics and Paper 1- 100 100  
Gynecology    
 Paper 2- 100   
Pediatrics Pape r-1 100 100  
Medicine & allied Paper-2 to have Medicine 50%, Psychiatry 25% and Dermatology 25% 
questions. 
Surgery & allied Paper-2 to have General Surgery 40%, Orthopedics 40%, Anesthesia 10% 
and Radiodiagnosis 10%. 
Any further updates as per NEXT regulations.

60 
Annexure 9 
 
 
 
Suggested format for a Theory paper – Universities and colleges may design their 
unique question paper blueprint as per the principles given in the format 
Duration-3 hours 100 marks 
 
Type of question/ Number of 
questions 
Marks per question 
Q No 1 Scenario based MCQ/ 10-20 1-2 
Q No 2 Long essay question/ ONE 10-12 
Q No 3 Reasoning Questions/ FIVE 3 
Q No 4 Short notes (applied aspects)/ 
FOUR 
All four subparts related to six 
integrated topics if subject is part 
of integrated modules. However, if 
a subject has less competencies in 
integrated module than atleast 2 
sub-parts from integrated modules. 
4-5 
Q No 5 Short notes / THREE 5-6 
Q No 6 Short notes / FOUR 
(one subpart of 5 marks from 
AETCOM) 
4-5

61 
Annexure 10- Phase I Alignment

62 
Annexure 11- Phase 2 Alignment 
  
Pathology 
 
Microbiology 
 
Pharmacology 
1st month Gen. Path Gen. Micro, Communication and 
Ethics(14 competencies) 
Gen. Pharm 
2nd month Gen. Path Gen. Micro, Communication and
Ethics(14 competencies) 
Gen. Pharm 
3rd month Inflammation 
Immunology 
HIV 
Immunology and Immunological 
Disorders (8 competencies) 
(ANS/PNS) 
NSAIDs 
4th month Immunology Immunology and Immunological 
Disorders 
Immunosuppressants 
CVS 
CVS CVS & Bloodstream infections 
(1.5 months) 
1st Internal Assessment
5th month CVS 
Hematology 
CVS & Bloodstream infections 
(1.5 months) 
CVS 
Blood 
6th month Respiratory 
System (2-3 
weeks) 
Respiratory System (2.5 weeks) 
Tb 
Chemo 
7th month Respiratory 
System CNS 1.5 weeks 
Respiratory System 
TB (7 hours) 
CNS 4weeks CNS 2 hours 
Kidney 
2nd Internal Assessment
8th month Kidney 
Genito-urinary 2 
weeks 
Genito-urinary and STI 2 wks 
GIT 
Hepatobiliary 
Chemotherapy 
9th month GIT 
Hepatobiliary 
GIT 
Hepatobiliary 
GIT 
10th month Bone 
Breast 
Skin, eye, joints 
Endocrine 
Musculoskeletal system, Skin 
and Soft Tissue Infections 
(2 weeks) 
Zoonotic & Miscellaneous 
Infections (2 weeks) 
HAI and Antimicrobial 
Stewardship 
Hospital Infection Control 
Drugs on skin, ocular 
Endocrine 
3rd Internal Assessment/ Pre University
11th month Phase 2 University Exam

63 
Annexure 12-FAMILY ADOPTION PROGRAMME 
CURRICULUM FOR FAMILY ADOPTION PROGRAMME (FAP) 
The National Medical Commission (N MC) envisages the FAP as an o pportunity for the 
Institute(s) to discharge its social responsibility and as a cr itical platform to facilitate 
Authentic learning of the under-graduate students to  sensitize them with the real- life 
challenges of working for the Un iversal health coverage (UHC). The FAP will present an 
opportunity for the students to e xperience the health inequitie s and understand the social 
factors contributing to it. 
The FAP is expected to complement  the other Competency-Based Me dical Education 
(CBME) reforms e.g., posting of interns in the public health facilities under the Compulsory 
Rotating Medical Internship (CRM I) and the District Residency P rogram (DRP) for 
producing socially-responsive competent Indian Medical Graduate s who would contribute 
for the cause of reducing inequities in health and society in t he future. Institute(s) should 
leverage collaboration and partne rship with the community and t h e  p u b l i c  h e a l t h  c a r e  
delivery system for effective implementation of the FAP so as to serve the larger purpose of 
the CBME reforms in the country. 
TARGETS TO BE ACHIEVED BY STUDENTS: 
 
Phase 1: 
 
1. Rapport building and connect with the families 
2. Learning communication skills and inspire trust building amongst families 
3. Understand the dynamics of community set-up of that region 
4. Mobilize families for participation in Screening programs 
5. Undertake detailed family study and prepare the family diagnosis to identify diseases/ 
ill-health/ malnutrition of allotted families/ risk factors / scope for health promotion 
6. Formulate objectives to be achieved for each family

64 
Phase 2: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Phase 3: 
 
1. Continue active involvement to become the first doctor /reference point of the 
family by continued active interaction 
2. Ensure follow-up of members from adopted families for vaccination, growth 
monitoring and promotion, menstr ual hygiene, IFA prophylaxis, h ealth 
lifestyle adoption, nutrition, v ector control measures, complia nce to 
medications etc. 
3. Work collaboratively with adopted  families to achieve the formu lated 
objectives 
4. Inform families about ongoing government sponsored health related programs 
5. Ensure appropriate referral of fam ily members considering their  choice for 
additional or annual screening at higher health facilities. 
 
1. Work collaboratively with adopted  families to achieve the formu lated 
objectives 
2. Observation of services delivered at the community level during  Village 
Health Nutrition Days (VHND), Co mmunity-based events (CBEs), He alth 
and Wellness Centres (HWC) camp s under the different national h ealth 
program 
3. Build understanding regarding wo rk of frontline workers (ANM, 
ASHA/USHA, AWW, MPW) through interaction 
4. Build understanding around intersectoral action for health through Local self- 
governing bodies, NGOs, SHGs etc for health promotion 
5. Undertake short term action projects for improving health in th e adopted 
families or community 
6. Analysis of their own involvement and impact on improving the h ealth 
conditions in the adopted families 
Final visit to have last round of active interaction with famil ies - prepare a report to be 
submitted to department addressing: 
1. Improvement in overall health of the family 
2. Immunization

65 
3. Sanitation, 
4. De-addiction 
5. Whether healthy lifestyles l ike reading good books. Sports/yoga  activities 
have been inculcated in the house-holds 
6. Improvement in anaemia, tuberculosis control 
7. Health awareness 
8. Any other issues 
9. Role of the student in supporting family during illness / medical emergency 
10. Social responsibility in the for m of environment protection pro gramme in 
form of plantation drive (medicinal plants/trees) cleanliness a nd sanitation 
drive with the initiative of the medical student 
 
 
Phase wise competencies to be achieved through the FAP

66

67

68

69 
LOG BOOK FOR FAMILY ADOPTION PROGRAMME 
 
(To be modified by the Institute as per their requirement) 
 
 
Institute: 
 
University: 
 
Name of the Student: 
 
Roll No: Batch: 
 
Address of Community for FAP: 
 
Number of Adopted Families: 
 
 
 
 
Names of Head of Household of Adopted families: 
 
 
 
 
Dates of Screening Camp:   
 
 
 
 
Name of Faculty Guide/Mentor 
 
 
 
 
Names of PGs/SRs Guide/Mentor 
 
Names of Para-medical staff Guide/Mentor

70 
Annexure 13 
 
DRAFT  GUIDELINES  FOR  MANPOWER  REQUIREMENT  FOR  RESEARCH 
FACILITIES  IN A MEDICAL COLLEGE 
Research labs may be under following categories: 
1. Molecular lab 
2. Stem cell research lab 
3. Cytogenetics lab 
4. HLA and tissue typing research lab 
5. Integrative Research lab 
 
 
Applied Clinical research for organ perfusion, cancer research, in vitro fertilization, etc. can 
be under any of the above research facilities. 
For integrative research lab, qualified faculty from Yoga/ Ayurvedic/ Siddha etc can also be 
employed and man-power may be selected as per AYUSH guidelines. 
 
MAN POWER 
(1) Lab Director-post-1 
Minimum Qualifications required: 
MD Path/ MD Microbiology/ MD Transfusion Medicine/ MD Biochemistry/ 
Faculty with PhD/ MSc PhD may be taken if exceptional in research. 
Lab work: 10 years experience 
Lab research related publications- minimum 10 in last 10 years 
(2) Lab Supervisor- post-1 (per research facility) 
Minimum Qualifications required: 
MD Path/ MD Microbiology/ MD Transfusion Medicine/ MD Biochemistry 
Faculty with PhD (Medical s ubject) will be preferred 
or MSc in life sciences with PhD from Medical college 
Lab work: 7 years experience 
Lab research related publications- minimum 5 in last 5 years

71 
(3) Senior Scientific Research Officer- posts- 1 or more (per research facility) 
Minimum Qualifications required: 
PhD with MD Path/ MD Microbiology/ MD Transfusion Medicine/ MD Biochemistry / 
PhD in medical college or MSc in life sciences with PhD from medical college 
Lab work: 4years experience 
Lab research related publications- minimum 3 in last 3 years 
(4) Junior Research Officer-posts- 1 or more (per research facility) 
Minimum Qualifications required: 
MD Path/ MD Microbiology/ MD Transfusion Medicine/ MD Biochemistry or Diploma 
in Clinical Pathology/ MSc in life sciences, PhD scholar/ Postdoc fellow 
Diploma holder in any branch may pursue PhD if experience / res earch inclinations 
proved for minimum of 1 year. They can be enrolled for integrated Master’s PhD course. 
 
Lab work: 1 year experience 
Lab research related publications- preferably 1 in last 2 years 
(5) Laboratory Technicians- Posts- minimum 2 
Minimum Qualifications required: BSc/ MSc, in life sciences including Biotechnology, 
DMLT 
(6)  Data entry operator/ Clerk -1 (minimum) 
Minimum Qualifications required:  
Graduation  
(7) Store keeper -1 (minimum) 
Minimum Qualifications required: Graduate 
Experience: 5 years 
(8) Biostatistician- 1(minimum)-Asst Professor/ Above 
Experience: 5 years 
(9) Lab attendant 
(10) Peon/ Multi-task worker 
(11) Clinical Monitors- 
Any MBBS or above with research inclination 
(12) Social worker/ MSW with applied research 
inclinations

72 
 
 
       DISABILITY GUIDELINES 
    Modified guidelines for the academic year 2025-’26 onwards regarding admission of students  
    with ‘specified disabilities’ under the ‘Rights Of Persons With Disabilities Act 2016’ with respect  
    to admission in MBBS will be notified separately. Till further notice, the disability guidelines (page    
    numbers 96 to 98) stipulated under CBME Guidelines 2023 dated 1st August, 2023 shall be  
    applicable for the academic year 2024-’25.

1 
NATIONAL MEDICAL COMMISSION 
COMPETENCY BASED UNDERGRADUATE CURRICULUM 
FOR 
THE INDIAN MEDICAL GRADUATE 
Volume I-2024

2 
COMPETENCY BASED UNDERGRADUATE CURRICULUM 
FOR THE 
INDIAN MEDICAL GRADUATE 
2024 
 
 
National Medical Commission 
Pocket-14, Sector- 8, Dwarka 
New Delhi 110 077

3  
 
 
 
FOREWORD 
 
 
The National Medical Commission (N MC) was created on 24th Septe mber, 2020 by the Act of Parliament replacing the erstwhile Med ical 
Council of India and Board of Governors. The foundation for mak ing of an Indian Medical Gradua te (‘Doctor’) depends on buildin g a sound base of 
medical education. In the year 2019, a committed team appointed  by erstwhile MCI revolutionized the age-old didactic teaching system in Indian 
medical colleges by bringing in Competency Based Medical Education (CBME). This unique approach has raised the level of medica l education with 
respect to quality, versatility and horizontal- vertical alignment of all subjects. The mandate of NMC to see that the first line of health care leaders who 
reach out to the common masses empathizing with the problems of the rural populace are being met with. The two-pronged approach of increasing the 
quantity and improving the quality of medical education is being tackled with this approach. 
 
Education has now become student-centric and patient-centric instead of pedagogic system. The first batch of students have now completed their 
training under CBME implemented i n 2019. It was a demand from a ctively involved academia to revisit the curriculum and modify it so as to keep 
abreast at international level. Interim years of covid pandemic also were ‘a good teaching academy’ for all. Increasing influence of artificial intelligence 
on student community, matched with rising cost of medical education and competitiveness, instead of accommodative, helping and balanced approach,

4  
has led to increasing risk of losing social intelligence and humane approach amidst the emerging doctors. The risk of creating overqualified clerks looms 
large on our medical system. 
 
A national team of experienced as well as emerging empathetic and talented teachers engaged as full-time faculty in various medical institutions 
were invited by the Undergraduate Education Board (UGMEB) of the NMC to invest their extra energy and hours to assess the curricula, examinations, 
AETCOM, vertical and horizontal integration of various subjects and bring in modifications. Each subject had committee of five persons on an average, 
from different parts of the country. Totally 93 experts have given their valuable time and energy in framing this new curriculum and all three volumes, 
prepared by their predecessors in 2019. The hard work done by them was the base on which this edifice has further been refined. 
 
We are sure that fraternity and students are going to have an e ducational journey that will be full of fun, knowledge and expe rience sharing. 
UGMEB of the NMC acknowledges each and every one involved in th e process, named and unsung heroes who have been the part of th is exercise of 
bringing the document to the readers. 
 
 
Dr. Aruna V. Vanikar, President, 
Dr. Vijayendra Kumar, Member, 
UGMEB.

5  
Contents Volume I 
 
S. No. Subject Legend Page No. 
(1) How to use the Manual 
 
8 
(ii) Definitions used in the Manual 
 
28 
(iii) Subject wise Competencies 
  
1. Anatomy AN 32 
2. Physiology PY 74 
3. Biochemistry BC 86 
4. Pharmacology PH 98 
5. Pathology PA 111 
6. Microbiology MI 130 
7. Forensic Medicine & Toxicology FM 140 
(iv) List of contributing subject experts 
 
160

6  
Contents Volume II 
 
S. No. Subject Legend Page No. 
(i) How to use the Manual  8 
(ii) Definitions used in the Manual  28 
(iii) Subject wise Competencies   
1. Community Medicine CM 32 
2. General Medicine GM 44 
3. Paediatrics PE 92 
4. Psychiatry PS 114 
5. Dermatology, Venereology & Leprosy DE 118 
(iv) List of contributing subject experts  125

7  
Contents Volume III 
 
S. No. Subject Legend Page No. 
(i) How to use the Manual  8 
(ii) Definitions used in the Manual  28 
(iii) Subject wise Competencies   
1. General Surgery SU 32 
2. Ophthalmology OP 44 
3. Otorhinolaryngology EN 50 
4. Obstetrics & Gynaecology OG 57 
5. Orthopaedics’ OR 74 
6. Anaesthesiology AS 82 
7. Radiodiagnosis RT 87 
(iv) List of contributing subject experts  91

8  
How to use the Manual 
 
This Manual is intended for curriculum planners in an institution to design learning and assessment experiences for the MBBS student. Contents created by 
subject experts have been curated to provide guidance for the curriculum planners, leaders and teachers in medical schools. The manual must be used with reference 
to and in the context of the Regulations. 
Section 1 
 
Competencies for the Indian Medical Graduate 
 
Section 1 - provides the Roles (global competencies) extracted from the Competency Based Medical Education (CBME) Guidelines, 2024. The global competencies 
identified as defining the roles of the Indian Medical Graduate are the broad competencies that the learner must aspire to achieve, teachers and curriculum planners 
must ensure that the learning experiences are aligned to this Manual. 
Extract from the Competency Based Medical Education (CBME) Guid elines, 2024 
 
2. Objectives of the Indian Graduate Medical Training Programme 
 
The undergraduate medical education program is designed with a goal to create an "Indian Medical Graduate" (IMG) possessing r equisite knowledge, skills, 
attitudes, values and responsiveness, so that she or he may function appropriately and effectively as a physician of first contact of the community while being globally 
relevant. To achieve this, the following national and institutional goals for the learner of the Indian Medical Graduate training program are hereby advocated. The first 
contact physician needs to be skilful to perform duties of primary care physician and have requisite skills for promotive, preventative, rehabilitative, palliative care & 
referral services.

9  
2.1 National Goals 
 
At the end of undergraduate program, the Indian Medical Graduate should be able to: 
 
a. Recognize "health for all" as a national goal and health right of all citizens and by undergoing training for medical profess ion to fulfill his social 
obligations towards realization of this goal. 
b. Learn key aspects of National policies on health and devote himself to its practical implementation. 
 
c. Achieve competence in the practice of holistic medicine, encompassing promotive, preventive, curative and rehabilitative aspects of common 
diseases. 
d. Develop scientific temper, acquire educational experience for p roficiency in profession and promote healthy living. 
 
e. Become an exemplary citizen by observance of medical ethics and fulfilling social and professional obligations, so as to respond to national 
aspirations. 
2.2 Institutional Goals 
 
In consonance with the national goals, each medical institution should evolve institutional goals to define the kind of train ed manpower (or professionals) 
they intend to produce. The Indian Medical Graduates coming out of a medical institute should be competent in diagnosis and management of common health 
problems of the individual and the community, commensurate with his/her position as a member of the health team at the primar y, secondary or tertiary levels, 
using his/her clinical skills based on history, physical examination and relevant investigations. 
a.  Be competent for working in the health care team from Phase I MBBS to Compulsory rotatory medical internship (CRMI) in a gradual manner with 
increasing complexity in an integrated multi-department involvement. 
b. Be competent to practice preventive, promotive, curative, palli ative and rehabilitativeꞏ medicine in respect to the commonly e ncountered health problems.

10  
c. Appreciate rationale for different therapeutic modalities; be f amiliar with the administration of the "essential medicines" an d their common adverse effects. 
 
d.  Appreciate the socio-psychological, cultural, economic and environmental factors affecting health and develop humane attitude towards the patients in 
discharging one's professional responsibilities. 
e. Possess the attitude for continued self-learning and to seek further expertise or to pursue research in any chosen area of medicine, action research and 
documentation skills. 
f. Be familiar with the basic factors which are essential for the implementation of the National Health Programs including practical aspects of the following: 
 
i. Family Welfare and Maternal and Child Health (MCH); 
 
ii. Sanitation and water supply; 
 
iii. Prevention and control of communicable and non-communicable dis eases; 
 
iv. Immunization; 
 
v. Health Education and advocacy; 
 
vi. Indian Public Health Standards (IPHS) at various level of service delivery; 
 
vii. Bio-medical waste disposal; 
 
viii. Organizational and or institutional arrangements. 
 
g.  Acquire basic management skills in the area of human resources, materials and resource management related to health care delivery, general and 
hospital management, principal inventory skills and counselling.

11  
h.  Be able to identify community health problems and learn to work to resolve these by designing, instituting corrective steps and evaluating outcome of 
such measures with maximum community participation. 
i. Be able to work as a leading partner in health care teams and acquire proficiency in communication skills. 
 
j. Be competent to work in a variety of health care settings. 
 
k. Have personal characteristics and attitudes required for professional life including personal integrity, sense of responsibility, dependability, and ability 
to relate to or show concern for other individuals. 
All efforts must be made to equip the medical graduates to acqu ire certifiable skills as given in comprehensive list of skills  recommended as desirable for 
Bachelor of Medicine and Bachelor of Surgery (MBBS) Indian Medical Graduate, as given in the Graduate Medical Education Regulations. 
2.3 Goals for the Learner 
 
In order to fulfil these goals, the Indian Medical Graduate must be able to function in the following roles appropriately and effectively:- 
 
a. Clinician who understands and provides preventive, promotive, curative, palliative and holistic care with compassion. 
 
b. Leader and member of the health care team and system with capabilities to collect, analyse, synthesize and communicate health data appropriately. 
 
c. Communicate with patients, families, colleagues, community and community in a methodological and skillful way using various approaches in family 
visits, family adoption program, clinic-social cases, clinical cases and AETCOM training programs. 
d. Lifelong learner committed to continuous improvement of skills and knowledge. 
 
e. Professional, who is committed to excellence, is ethical, responsive and accountable to patients, community, profession, and society. Training of 
humanities and social sciences will be useful for this training.

12  
3. Competency Based Training Programme of the Indian Medical Graduate 
 
Competency based learning would include designing and implementing medical education. Curriculum that focuses on the desired and observable activity in 
real life situations. In order to effectively fulfil the roles, the Indian Medical Graduate would have obtained the following set of competencies at the time of graduation: 
3.1 Clinician, who understands and provides preventive, promotive, curative, palliative and holistic care with compassion. 
 
3.1.1 Demonstrate knowledge of normal human structure, function and development from a molecular, cellular, biological, clinical, behavioral and social 
perspective. 
3.1.2 Demonstrate knowledge of abnormal human structure, function and development from a molecular, cellular, biological, clinical, behavioral and 
social perspective. 
3.1.3 Demonstrate knowledge of medico-legal, societal, ethical and hu manitarian principles that influence healthcare. 
 
3.1.4 Demonstrate knowledge of national and regional health care policies including the National Health Mission that incorporates N ational Rural Health 
Mission (NRHM) and National Urban Health Mission (NUHM), frameworks, economics and systems that influence health promotion, health care 
delivery, disease prevention, effectiveness, responsiveness, quality and patient safety. 
3.1.5 Demonstrate ability to elicit and record from the patient, and other relevant sources including relatives and caregivers, a history that is complete and 
relevant to disease identification, disease prevention and health promotion. 
3.1.6 Demonstrate ability to elicit and record from the patient, and other relevant sources. including relatives and caregivers, a history that is contextual to 
gender, age, vulnerability, social and economic status, patient preferences, beliefs and values. 
3.1.7 Demonstrate ability to perform a physical examination that is c omplete and relevant to disease identification, disease prevention and health promotion.

13  
3.1.8 Demonstrate ability to perform a physical examination that is contextual to gender, social and economic status, patient preferences and values. 
 
3.1.9 Demonstrate effective clinical problem solving, judgment and ability to interpret and integrate available data in order to address patient problems, 
generate differential diagnoses and develop individualized management plans that include preventive, promotive and therapeutic goals. 
3.1.10 Maintain accurate, clear and appropriate record of the patient in conformation with legal and administrative frameworks. 
 
3.1.11 Demonstrate ability to choose the appropriate diagnostic tests and interpret these tests based on scientific validity, cost effectiveness and clinical 
context. 
3.1.12 Demonstrate ability to prescribe and safely administer appropriate therapies including nutritional interventions, pharmacotherapy and interventions 
based on the principles of rational drug therapy, scientific validity, evidence and cost that conform to established national and regional health 
programmes and policies for the following: 
a. Disease prevention, 
 
b. Health promotion and cure, 
 
c. Pain and distress alleviation, and 
 
d. Rehabilitation and palliation. 
 
3.1.13 Demonstrate ability to provide a continuum of care at the primary (including home care) and/or secondary level that addresses chronicity, mental 
and physical disability, 
3.1.14 Demonstrate ability to appropriately identify and refer patients who may requireꞏ specialized or advanced tertiary care. 
 
3.1.15 Demonstrate familiarity with basic, clinical and translational research as it applies to the care of the patient.

14  
3.2 Leader and member of the health care team and system 
 
3.2.1 Work effectively and appropriately with colleagues in an inter- professional health care team res pecting diversity of roles, re sponsibilities and 
competencies of other professionals. 
3.2.2 Recognize and function effectively, responsibly and appropriately as a health care team leader in primary and secondary health care settings. 
 
3.2.3 Educate and motivate other members of the team and work in a co llaborative and collegial fashion that will help maximize the h ealth care delivery 
potential of the team. 
3.2.4 Access and utilize components of the health care system and health delivery in a_ manner that is appropriate, cost effective, fair and in compliance 
with the national health care priorities and policies, as well as be able to collect, analyse and utilize health data. 
3.2.5 Participate appropriately and effectively in measures that will advance quality of health care and patient safety within the health care system. 
 
3.2.6 Recognize and advocate health promotion, disease prevention and health care quality improvement through prevention and early recognition: in a) 
life style diseases and b) cancer, in collaboration with other members of the health care team. 
3.3 Communicator with patients, families, colleagues and community 
 
3.3.1 Demonstrate ability to communicate adequately, sensitively, eff ectively and respectfully with patients, families, colleagues a nd community in a 
language that patients, families, colleagues and community understands and in a manner that will improve patient patients, families, colleagues and 
community satisfaction and health care outcomes. 
3.3.2 Demonstrate ability to establish professional relationships wit h patients, families, colleagues and community that are positiv e, understanding, humane, 
ethical, empathetic, and trustworthy. 
3.3.3 Demonstrate ability to communicate with patients, families, colleagues and community in a manner respectful of patient’s preferences, values, pri or

15  
experience, beliefs, confidentiality and privacy. 
 
3.3.4 Demonstrate ability to communicate with patients, colleagues and families in a manner that encourages participation and shared decision- making 
and overcoming hesitancy towards health initiatives. 
3.4 Lifelong learner committed to continuous improvement of skills and knowledge 
 
3.4.1 Demonstrate ability to perform an objective self-assessment of knowledge and skills, continue learning, refine existing skills and acquire new skills. 
 
3.4.2 Demonstrate ability to apply newly gained knowledge or skills to the care of the patient. 
 
3.4.3 Demonstrate ability to introspect and utilize experiences, to enhance personal and professional growth and learning. 
 
3.4.4 Demonstrate ability to search (including through electronic means), and critically re- evaluate the medical literature and apply the information in the 
care of the patient. 
3.4.5 Be able to identify and select an appropriate career pathway that is professionally rewarding and personally fulfilling. 
 
3.5 Professional who is committed to excellence, is ethical, responsive and accountable to patients, the profession and community. 
 
3.5.1 Practice selflessness, integrity, responsibility, accountabilit y and respect. 
 
3.5.2 Respect and maintain professional boundaries between patients, colleagues and society. 
 
3.5.3 Demonstrate ability to recognize and manage ethical and professional conflicts. 
 
3.5.4 Abide by prescribed ethical and legal codes of conduct and practice. 
 
3.5.5 Demonstrate commitment to the growth of the medical profession as a whole.

16  
Section 2 
Subject-wise competencies 
 
Section 2 contains subject-wise competencies that must be achieved at the end of instruction in that subject. These are organised in tables. 
 
Competencies (Outcomes) in each subject are grouped according to topics number-wise. It is important to review the individual competencies in the light of the topic 
outcomes as a whole. For each co mpetency outlined - the learnin g domains (Knowledge, Skill, Attitude, and Communication) are i dentified. The expected level of 
achievement in that subject is i dentified as – [knows (K), know s how (KH), shows how (SH), perf orm (P)]. As a rule, ‘perform’ indicates independent performance 
without supervision and is required rarely in the pre-internship period. The competency is a core (Y - must achieve) or a non-core (N - desirable) outcome. Suggested 
learning and assessment methods (these are suggestions) and exp lanation of the terms used are g iven under the section “definitions used in this document”. The 
suggested number of times a skill must be performed independently for certification in the learner’s log book is also given. 
The number of topics and competencies in each subject are given below:

17  
Topics and competencies in Phase 1 & Phase 2 subjects (Volume I ) 
 
Sr. No. Subjects Number of topics Number of 
competencies 
1. Anatomy 82 413 
2. Physiology 12 136 
3. Biochemistry 14 84 
4. Pharmacology 10 92 
5. Pathology 35 182 
6. Microbiology 11 74 
7. Forensic Medicine 14 158 
 
Total 178 1139

18  
Topics competencies in Medicine and Allied subjects (Volume II)  
 
Sr. No. Subjects Number of topics Number of competencies 
1. Community Medicine 20 136 
2. General Medicine 29 525 
3. Paediatrics 35 406 
4. Psychiatry 13 17 
5. Dermatology, Venereology & Leprosy 15 48 
 
Total 112 1132

19  
Topics and competencies in Surgery and Allied subjects (Volume III) 
 
Sr. No. Subjects Number of topics Number of competencies 
1. General Surgery 30 133 
2. Ophthalmology 10 60 
3. Otorhinolaryngology 04 63 
4. Obstetrics & Gynaecology 38 141 
5. Orthopaedics’ 14 40 
6. Anaesthesiology 11 52 
7. Radiodiagnosis 07 21 
 
Total 114 510

20  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Understanding the competencies table

21  
 
observation 
 
 
 
Y 
Understanding the competencies table 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Elicit document and 
present a medical history 
that helps delineate the 
Bed Side clinic, 
SH DOAP 
 
Description of competency Identifies if the 
competency is core or 
desirable 
Y indicates Core; 
N-non-core 
 
. Unique number of the competency Identifies the domain Number of times a 
Skill needs to be done 
 
 
 
 
 
LGT-Large group teaching; SGT-Small group teaching; OSCE-Objective structured clinical examination; P- indicate how many competencies/competencies must be done independently under 
PY1.1 
 
Assessment 
 
Learning Method 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3 S  
IM 4.10 
Y KH K Describe the structure and 
functions of a 
Physiology

22  
observation for Certification. * Numbers given are for illustrative purposes only and should not be compared with the same in curriculum documents

23 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Deriving learning objectives from competencies

24

25 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Deriving learning methods from competencies

26

27 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Deriving assessment methods from competencies

28

29 
Definitions used in the Manual 
1. Goal: A projected state of affairs that a person or system plans to a chieve. In other words: Where do you want to go? or What do you want to  become? 
2. Competency: The habitual and judicious use of communication, knowledge, tec hnical skills, clinical reasoning, emotions, values, and reflec tion in daily practice for 
the benefit of the individual and community being served. In other words: What should you have? or What should have changed? 
3. Objective: Statement of what a learner should be able to do at the end of a specific learning experience. In other words: What the Indian Medical Graduate should know, 
do, or behave. 
Action Verbs used in this manual 
 
Knowledge Skill Attitude/communicate 
Enumerate Identify Counsel 
List Demonstrate Inform 
Describe Perform under supervision Demonstrate understanding of 
Discuss Perform independently Communicate
Differentiate Document  
Define Present  
Classify Record  
Choose Elicit  
Interpret   
Report   
Note: Specified essential competencies only will be required to be performed independently at the end of the final year MBBS. 
1. The word ‘perform’ or ‘do’ is used ONLY if the task has to be done on patients or in laboratory practical in the pre/para- clinical phases. 
2. Most tasks that require performance during undergraduate years will be performed under supervision. 
3. If a certification to perform independently has been done, then the number of times the task has to be performed under supervision will be 
indicated in the last column.

30 
Explanation of terms used in this manual 
 
LGT  (LGT)  Any instructional large group method including interactive lec ture 
SGT (SGT) Any instructional method involving small groups of students in an appropriate 
learning context 
DOAP (Demonstration-Observation - Assistance- 
Performance) 
A practical session that allows the student to observe a demonstration, assist the performer, perform in a 
simulated environment, perform under supervision or perform ind ependently 
Skill assessment/ Direct observation A session that assesses the skill of the student including thos e in the practical laboratory, skills lab, 
skills station that uses mannequins/ paper case/simulated patients/real patients as the context demands 
DOPS (Directly observed procedural skills) DOPS is a method of assessment for assessing competency of the students in which the examiner 
directly observes the student performing procedure  
Core A competency that is necessary in order to complete the requirements of the subject (traditional must know) 
Non-Core A competency that is optional in order to complete the requirements of the subject (traditional nice (good) to 
know/ desirable to know) 
National Guidelines Health programs as relevant to the competency that are part of the National Health Program 
 
Domains of learning 
 
K Knowledge 
S Skill 
A Attitude 
C Communication

31 
Levels of competency 
 
K Knows A knowledge attribute - Usually enumerates or describes 
KH Knows how A higher level of knowledge - is able to discuss or analyze 
SH Shows how A skill attribute: is able to interpret/ demonstrate a complex procedure requiring thought, knowledge 
and behavior 
P Performs (under 
supervision or 
independently) 
Mastery for the level of competence - When done independently under supervision a pre-specified 
number of times - certification or capacity to perform independently results 
Note:  
1. In the table of competency - the highest level of competency acquired is specified and implies that the lower levels have been acquired already. Therefore, 
when a student is able to SH - Show how - an informed consent i s obtained - it is presumed that  the preceding steps - the know ledge, the analytical skills, the 
skill of communicating have all been obtained. 
 
2. It may also be noted that attainment of the highest level of co mpetency may be obtained through  steps spread over several subj ects or phases and not 
necessarily in the subject or the phase in which the competency has been identified

32 
 
Volume I 
Competency based Undergraduate Curriculum 
in 
Phase 1 & Phase 2 subjects

33 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ANATOMY (CODE: AN)

34 
Number COMPETENCY 
The student should be able to 
Predominant 
Domain 
K/S/A/C 
Level 
K/KH/S 
H/P 
Core 
(Y/N) 
Suggested Teaching 
Learning method 
Suggested Assessment 
method 
Number 
required 
to certify 
P 
Anatomy (Topics = 82, Competencies = 413) 
Topic 1: Anatomical terminology - Number of Competencies (2) Number o f competencies for certification: (NIL)  
AN1.1 Describe & Demonstrate normal anatomical position, various planes, 
relation, comparison, laterality & movements in the human body 
K/S SH Y LGT, Demonstration Written/ Viva 
voce/ skills 
assessment 
 
AN1.2 Describe composition of bone and bone marrow K K H Y LGT Written/ viva  
Topic 2: General features of bones& Joints Number o f Competencies (6) Number o f competencies for certification: (NIL)  
AN2.1 Describe parts, types, peculiarities of each type, blood and nerve supply of 
bones. 
K K H Y LGT Written/ viva 
voce 
 
AN2.2 Describe the laws of ossification, epiphysis, its various types andt h e i r  
importance 
K K H N LGT Written/ Viva 
voce 
 
AN2.3 Describe special features of a sesamoid bone K K H N LGT, Demonstration Written/ Viva 
voce 
 
AN2.4 Describe various types of cartilage with its structure& distribution in body K K H Y LGT, Demonstration Written/ Viva 
voce 
 
AN2.5 Describe & demonstrate various joints with possible movements, subtypes 
and examples 
K,S SH Y LGT, Demonstration Written/ Viva 
voce/skills 
assessment 
 
AN2.6 Explain the concept of nerve supply of joints& Hilton’s law K K H Y LGT, Demonstration Written/ Viva 
voce 
 
Topic 3: General features of Muscle Number o f Competencies (3) Number o f competencies for certification: (NIL)  
AN3.1 Classify & describe muscle tissue according to structure, size, shape, region
& action 
K K H Y LGT, Demonstration Written/ Viva 
voce

35 
Number COMPETENCY 
The student should be able to 
Predominant 
Domain 
K/S/A/C 
Level 
K/KH/S 
H/P 
Core 
(Y/N) 
Suggested Teaching 
Learning method 
Suggested Assessment 
method 
Number 
required 
to certify 
P 
AN3.2 Describe parts of skeletal muscle and differentiate between tendonsand 
aponeuroses with examples 
K K H Y LGT, Demonstration Written/ Viva 
voce 
 
AN3.3 Explain Shunt and spurt muscles with examples and role in joint 
movement 
K K H N LGT, Demonstration Written/ Viva 
voce 
 
Topic 4: General features of skin and fascia Number o f Competencies (5) Number o f competencies for certification: (NIL) 
AN4.1 Describe different types of skin & dermatomes in body K K H N LGT, Demonstration Written/ Viva 
voce 
 
AN4.2 Describe & demonstrate structure of skin with its appendages along with 
clinical anatomy 
K,S SH Y LGT, Demonstration Written/ Viva 
voce 
 
AN4.3 Describe structure, contents and identify modifications of superficial 
fascia along with fat distribution in body 
K,S SH Y LGT, Demonstration Written/ Viva 
voce 
 
AN4.4 Describe & demonstrate modifications of deep fascia with its location, 
function & examples 
K,S SH Y LGT, Demonstration Written/ Viva 
voce 
 
AN4.5 Explain principles of skin  incisions and their surgical importance K K H N LGT, Demonstration Written  
Topic 5: General features of the cardiovascular system Number o f Competencies (8) Number of competencies for certification: (NIL) 
AN5.1 Differentiate between blood vascular and lymphatic system K K H Y LGT, Demonstration Written/ Viva 
voce 
 
AN5.2 Differentiate between pulm onary and systemic circulation K K H Y LGT, Demonstration Written/ Viva 
voce 
 
AN5.3 Describegeneral differences between arteries, veins and sinuses K K H Y LGT, Demonstration Written/ Viva 
voce 
 
AN5.4 Explain functional and gross structural differences between elastic, 
muscular arteries and arterioles 
K K H Y LGT, Demonstration Written/ Viva 
voce 
 
AN5.5 Describe portal system giving examples K K H Y LGT, Demonstration Written/ Viva 
voce 
 
AN5.6 Describe the concept of anastomoses and collateral circulation, its 
different sites & significance of end arteries 
K K H Y LGT, Demonstration Written/ Viva 
voce

36 
Number COMPETENCY 
The student should be able to 
Predominant 
Domain 
K/S/A/C 
Level 
K/KH/S 
H/P 
Core 
(Y/N) 
Suggested Teaching 
Learning method 
Suggested Assessment 
method 
Number 
required 
to certify 
P 
AN5.7 Explain function of meta-arterioles, precapillary sphincters, arterio-venous 
anastomoses 
K K H N LGT, Demonstration Written/ Viva 
voce 
 
AN5.8 Describe thrombosis, infarction & aneurysm K K H N LGT, Demonstration Written/ Viva 
voce 
 
Topic 6: General Features of lymphatic system Number o f Competencies (3) Number of competencies for certification: (NIL)  
AN6.1 Describe the components and functions of the lymphatic system K K H N LGT, Demonstration Written/ Viva 
voce 
 
AN6.2 Describe structure of lymph capillaries & mechanism of lymph circulation K K H N LGT, Demonstration Written  
AN6.3 Explain the concept of lymphoedema and spread of tumors via lymphatics 
and venous system 
K K H N LGT, Demonstration Written/ Viva 
voce 
 
Topic 7: Introduction to the nervous system Number o f Competencies (8) Number of competencies for certification: (NIL)  
AN7.1 Describe general plan of nervous system with components of central, 
peripheral & autonomic nervous systems 
K K H Y LGT, Demonstration Written/ Viva 
voce 
 
AN7.2 List components of ner vous tissue and their functions K K H Y LGT, Demonstration Written/ Viva 
voce 
 
AN7.3 Describe parts of a neuron and classify them based on number of neurites, 
size & function 
K K H Y LGT, Demonstration Written/ Viva 
voce 
 
AN7.4 Describe structure of a typical spinal nerve K K H Y LGT, Demonstration Written/ Viva 
voce 
 
AN7.5 Describe principles of sensory and motor innervation of muscles K K H N LGT, Demonstration Written  
AN7.6 Describe concept of loss of innervation of a muscle with its applied 
anatomy 
K K H Y LGT, Demonstration Written/ Viva 
voce 
 
AN7.7 Describe various types of synapse K K H N LGT, Demonstration Written  
AN7.8 Describe differences between sympathetic and spinal ganglia K K H N LGT, Demonstration Written  
Topic 8: Features of individual bones (Upper Limb) Number o f Competencies (4) Number of competencies for certification: (NIL)  
AN8.1 Identify the given bone, its side, anatomical position, joint formation, 
important features and clinical anatomy (clavicle, scapula, humerus, 
radius , ulna, carpal bones) 
K,S SH Y Demonstration Written/ Viva 
voce/ skill 
assessment

37 
Number COMPETENCY 
The student should be able to 
Predominant 
Domain 
K/S/A/C 
Level 
K/KH/S 
H/P 
Core 
(Y/N) 
Suggested Teaching 
Learning method 
Suggested Assessment 
method 
Number 
required 
to certify 
P 
AN8.2 Demonstrate important muscle attachments on the given bone K,S SH Y Demonstration Written/ Viva 
voce/ skill 
assessment 
 
AN8.3 Identify and name various bones in articulated hand, Specify the parts 
of metacarpals and phalanges and enumerate the peculiarities of 
pisiform 
K,S SH Y Demonstration Viva voce 
Practicals 
 
AN8.4 Describe scaphoid fracture and explain the anatomical basis of avascular 
necrosis 
K K H N LGT, Demonstration Viva voce  
Topic 9: Pectoral region Number o f Competencies (3) Number o f competencies for certification: (NIL)  
AN9.1 Describe attachment, nerve supply & action of pectoralis major and 
pectoralis minor and describe clavipectoral fascia 
K K H Y LGT, Practical, 
Demonstration, 
Dissection 
Written/ Viva 
voce 
 
AN9.2 Describe the location, extent, deep relations, structure, 
blood supply, lymphatic drainage, microanatomy and 
applied anatomy of breast 
K K H Y LGT, Written/ Viva 
voce 
 
AN9.3 Describe development of breast, associated age changes and congenital 
anomalies 
K K H N LGT, Demonstration Written/ Viva 
voce 
 
Topic 10: Axilla, Shoulder and Scapular region Number o f Competencies (13) Number o f competencies for certification: (NIL)  
AN10.1 Identify & describe boundaries and contents of axilla K,S SH Y LGT, Practical, 
Demonstration, 
Dissection 
Written/ Viva 
voce/ skill 
assessment 
 
AN10.2 Identify, describe and demonstrate the origin, extent, course, parts, 
relations and branches of axillary artery & tributaries of axillary vein 
K,S SH Y LGT, Practical, 
Demonstration, 
Dissection 
Written/ Viva 
voce/ skill 
assessment 
 
AN10.3 Describe, identify and demonstrate formation, branches, relations, area 
of supply of branches, course and relations of terminal branche s of 
brachial plexus 
K,S SH Y LGT, Practical, 
Demonstration, 
Dissection 
Written/ Viva 
voce/ skill 
assessment

38 
Number COMPETENCY 
The student should be able to 
Predominant 
Domain 
K/S/A/C 
Level 
K/KH/S 
H/P 
Core 
(Y/N) 
Suggested Teaching 
Learning method 
Suggested Assessment 
method 
Number 
required 
to certify 
P 
AN10.4 Describe the anatomical groups of axillary lymph nodes and specifytheir 
areas of drainage 
K K H Y LGT, Practical, 
Demonstration, 
Dissection 
Written/ Viva 
voce/ skill 
assessment 
 
AN10.5 Explain variations in formation of brachial plexus K K H Y LGT, Practical, 
Demonstration, 
Dissection 
Written/ Viva 
voce 
 
AN10.6 Explain the anatomical basis of clinical features of Erb’s palsy and
Klumpke’s paralysis 
K K H Y LGT, Demonstration Written/ Viva 
voce 
 
AN10.7 Describe axillary lymph nodes, areas of drainage and anatomical basis of 
their enlargement 
K K H Y LGT, Practical, 
Demonstration, 
Dissection 
Written  
AN10.8 Describe, identify and demonstrate the position, attachment, nerve 
supply and actions of trapezius and latissimus dorsi 
K,S SH Y LGT, Practical, 
Demonstration, 
Dissection 
Written/ Viva 
voce/ skill 
assessment 
 
AN10.9 Describe the arterial anastomosis around the scapula and mention 
the boundaries of triangle of auscultation 
K K H N LGT, Practical, 
Demonstration, 
Dissection 
Written  
AN10.10 Describe and identify the deltoid and rotator cuff muscles along with 
their nerve supply and clinical anatomy 
K,S SH Y LGT, Practical, 
Demonstration, 
Dissection 
Written/ Viva 
voce/ skill 
assessment 
 
AN10.11 Describe & demonstrate attachment, action and clinical anatomy of 
serratus anterior muscle 
K,S SH Y LGT, Practical, 
Demonstration, 
Dissection 
Written/ Viva 
voce/ skill 
assessment 
 
AN10.12 Describe and demonstrate shoulder joint for– type, articular surfaces, 
capsule, synovial membrane, ligaments, relations, movements, muscles 
involved, blood supply, nerve supply and applied anatomy 
K,S SH Y LGT, Practical, 
Demonstration, 
Dissection 
Written/ Viva 
voce/ skill 
assessment

39 
Number COMPETENCY 
The student should be able to 
Predominant 
Domain 
K/S/A/C 
Level 
K/KH/S 
H/P 
Core 
(Y/N) 
Suggested Teaching 
Learning method 
Suggested Assessment 
method 
Number 
required 
to certify 
P 
AN10.13 Explain anatomical basis of Injury to axillary nerve during intramuscular 
injections 
K K H Y LGT Viva voce  
Topic 11: Arm & Cubital fossa Number o f Competencies (6) Number o f competencies for certification: (NIL) 
AN11.1 Describe and demonstrate muscle groups of upper arm with emphasis on 
biceps and triceps brachii 
K,S SH Y LGT, Practical, 
Demonstration, 
Dissection 
Written/ Viva 
voce/ skill 
assessment 
 
AN11.2 Identify & describe origin, course, relations, branches (or tributaries), 
termination of important nerves and vessels in arm 
K,S SH Y LGT, Practical, 
Demonstration, 
Dissection 
Written/ Viva 
voce/ skill 
assessment 
 
AN11.3 Describe the anatomical basis of Venipuncture of cubital veins K K H Y LGT, Demonstration Written/ Viva 
voce 
 
AN11.4 Describe the anatomical b asis of Saturday night paralysis K K H Y LGT, Demonstration Written/ Viva 
voce 
 
AN11.5 Identify & describe bound aries and contents of cubital fossa K,S SH Y LGT, Practical, 
Demonstration, 
Dissection 
Written/ Viva 
voce/ skill 
assessment 
 
AN11.6 Describe the anastomosis around the elbow joint K K H N LGT Written  
Topic 12: Forearm & hand Number o f Competencies (15) Number o f competencies for certification: (NIL) 
AN12.1 Describe and demonstrate important muscle groups of ventral forearm 
with attachments, nerve supply and actions 
K,S SH Y LGT, Practical, 
Demonstration, 
Dissection 
Written/ Viva 
voce/ skill 
assessment 
 
AN12.2 Identify & describe origin, course, relations, branches (or tributaries), 
termination of important nerves and vessels of forearm 
K,S SH Y LGT, Practical, 
Demonstration, 
Dissection 
Written/ Viva 
voce/ skill 
assessment

40 
Number COMPETENCY 
The student should be able to 
Predominant 
Domain 
K/S/A/C 
Level 
K/KH/S 
H/P 
Core 
(Y/N) 
Suggested Teaching 
Learning method 
Suggested Assessment 
method 
Number 
required 
to certify 
P 
AN12.3 Identify & describe flexo r retinaculum with its attachments K , S S H Y LGT, Practical, 
Demonstration, 
Dissection 
Written/ Viva 
voce/ skill 
assessment 
 
AN12.4 Explain anatomical basis of carpal tunnel syndrome K K H Y LGT, Demonstration Written/ Viva 
voce 
 
AN12.5 Identify & describe small muscles of hand. Also describe movements of 
thumb and muscles involved 
K,S SH Y LGT, Practical, 
Demonstration, 
Dissection 
Written/ Viva 
voce/ skill 
assessment 
 
AN12.6 Describe & demonstrate movements of thumb and muscles involvedK , S S H Y Practical, Demonstration Written/ Viva 
voce/ skill 
assessment 
 
AN12.7 Identify & describe course and branches of important blood vessels and 
nerves in hand 
K,S SH Y LGT, Practical, 
Demonstration, 
Dissection 
Written/ Viva 
voce/ skill 
assessment 
 
AN12.8 Describe anatomical basis of Claw hand K K H Y LGT, Demonstration, 
Practical 
Written/ Viva 
voce 
 
AN12.9 Identify & describe fibrous flexor sheaths, ulnar bursa, radialbursa and 
digital synovial sheaths 
K,S SH Y LGT, Practical, 
Demonstration, 
Dissection 
Written/ Viva 
voce 
 
AN12.10 Explain infection of fascial spaces of palm K K H N LGT Written  
AN12.11 Identify, describe and demonstrate important muscle groups of dorsal 
forearm with attachments, nerve supply and actions 
K,S SH Y LGT, Practical, 
Demonstration, 
Dissection 
Written/ Viva 
voce/ skill 
assessment 
 
AN12.12 Identify & describe origin, course, relations, branches (or tributaries), 
termination of important nerves and vessels of back of forearm 
K,S SH Y LGT, Practical, 
Demonstration, 
Dissection 
Written/ Viva 
voce/ skill 
assessment

41 
Number COMPETENCY 
The student should be able to 
Predominant 
Domain 
K/S/A/C 
Level 
K/KH/S 
H/P 
Core 
(Y/N) 
Suggested Teaching 
Learning method 
Suggested Assessment 
method 
Number 
required 
to certify 
P 
AN12.13 Describe the anatomical basis of Wrist drop K K H Y LGT, Demonstration Written/ Viva 
voce 
 
AN12.14 Identify & describe compartments deep to extensor retinaculum 
and describe the boundaries and contents of anatomical snuff 
box. 
K,S SH Y LGT, Practical, 
Demonstration, 
Dissection 
Written/ Viva 
voce/ skill 
assessment 
 
AN12.15 Identify & describe extensor expansion formation K,S SH Y LGT, Practical, 
Demonstration, 
Dissection 
Written/ Viva 
voce/ skill 
assessment 
 
Topic 13: General Features, Joints, radiographs& surface marking Number o f competencies: (8) Number o f competencies for certification: (NIL) 
AN13.1 Describe and explain Fascia of upper limb and compartments, veins of 
upper limb and its lymphatic drainage 
K K H Y LGT, demonstration Written/ Viva 
voce 
 
AN13.2 Describe dermatomes of upper limb K K H N LGT Written/ Viva 
voce 
 
AN13.3 Identify & describe the type, articular surfaces, capsule, synovial 
membrane, ligaments, relations, movements, blood and nerve supply 
of elbow joint, proximal and distal radio-ulnar joints, wrist joint & first 
carpometacarpal joint 
K,S SH Y LGT, Practical, 
Demonstration, 
Dissection 
Written/ Viva 
voce/ skill 
assessment 
 
AN13.4 Describe Sternoclavicular joint, Acromioclavicular 
joint, Carpometacarpal joints & 
Metacarpophalangealjoint 
K K H N LGT, Practical, 
Demonstration 
Written/ Viva 
voce/ skill 
assessment 
 
AN13.5 Identify the bones and joints of upper limb seen in anteroposterior 
and lateral view radiographs of shoulder region, arm, elbow, 
forearm and hand 
K,S SH Y LGT, Practical, 
Demonstration 
Viva voce/ skill 
assessment 
 
AN13.6 Identify & demonstrate important bony landmarks of upper limb: Jugular 
notch, sternal angle, acromial angle, spine of the scapula, vertebral level 
of the medial end and Inferior angle of the scapula 
K,S SH Y Practical, Demonstration Viva voce/ skill 
assessment

42 
Number COMPETENCY 
The student should be able to 
Predominant 
Domain 
K/S/A/C 
Level 
K/KH/S 
H/P 
Core 
(Y/N) 
Suggested Teaching 
Learning method 
Suggested Assessment 
method 
Number 
required 
to certify 
P 
AN13.7 Identify & demonstrate surface projection of:
Cephalic and basilic vein, Palpation of Brachial artery, Radial artery, 
Testing of muscles: Trapezius, p ectoralis major, serratus anterior, 
latissimus dorsi, deltoid, biceps brachii, Brachioradialis 
K,S SH Y Practical, Demonstration Viva voce/ skill 
assessment 
 
AN13.8 Describe development of upper limb K K H N LGT Written  
Topic 14: Features of individual bones (Lower Limb) Number o f Competencies (4) Number of competen cies for certification: (NIL)  
AN14.1 Identify the given bone, its side, anatomical position, joint formation, 
important features and clinical anatomy (hip bone, femur, tibia  
fibula, tarsal bones) 
K,S SH Y Demonstration Viva voce  
AN14.2 Identify & describe joints formed by the given bone K,S SH Y LGT, Demonstration Viva voce  
AN14.3 Describe the importance of ossification of lower end of femur & upper 
end of tibia, and explain violation of law of ossification in f ibula 
K K H Y LGT, Demonstration Viva voce  
AN14.4 Identify and name various bones in the articulated foot with individual
muscle attachment 
K,S SH N LGT, Demonstration Viva voce  
Topic 15: Front & Medial side of thigh Number o f Competencies (5) Number o f competencies for certification: (NIL)  
AN15.1 Describe and demonstrate origin, course, relations, branches (or 
tributaries), termination of important nerves and vessels of anterior 
thigh 
K,S SH Y LGT, Dissection, 
Practical, Demonstration 
Written/ Viva 
voce/ skill 
assessment 
 
AN15.2 Describe and demonstrate major muscles with their attachment, nerve 
supply and actions 
K,S SH Y LGT, Dissection, 
Practical, Demonstration 
Written/ Viva 
voce/ skill 
assessment 
 
AN15.3 Describe and demonstrate boundaries, floor, roof and contents of femoral 
triangle 
K,S SH Y LGT, Dissection, 
Practical, Demonstration 
Written/ Viva 
voce/ skill 
assessment 
 
AN15.4 Explain anatomical basis of Psoas abscess & Femoral hernia K K H N LGT, Demonstration Written/ Viva 
voce

43 
Number COMPETENCY 
The student should be able to 
Predominant 
Domain 
K/S/A/C 
Level 
K/KH/S 
H/P 
Core 
(Y/N) 
Suggested Teaching 
Learning method 
Suggested Assessment 
method 
Number 
required 
to certify 
P 
AN15.5 Describe and demonstrate adductor canal with its contents K,S SH Y LGT, Demonstration Written/ Viva 
voce/ skill 
assessment 
 
Topic 16: Gluteal region & back of thigh Number o f Competencies (6) Number o f competencies for certification: (NIL)  
AN16.1 Describe and demonstrate major muscles with their attachment, nerve 
supply and actions. 
K,S SH Y Dissection, LGT, SGT, 
Demonstration 
Written/ Viva 
voce/ skill 
assessment 
 
AN16.2 Describeanddemonstrate structures under thecover of gluteus maximus. 
Also explain the anatomical basis of sciatic nerve injury durin g gluteal 
intramuscular injections 
K,S SH Y Dissection, LGT, SGT, 
Demonstration 
Written/ Viva 
voce/ skill 
assessment 
 
AN16.3 Explain the anatomical basis of Trendelenburg sign K K H Y LGT, Demonstration Written/ Viva 
voce 
 
AN16.4 Describe and demonstrate the hamstrings group of muscles with their 
attachment, nerve supply and actions 
K,S SH Y Dissection, LGT, SGT, 
Demonstration 
Written/ Viva 
voce/ skill 
assessment 
 
AN16.5 Describe and demonstrate the origin, course, relations, branches 
(or tributaries), termination of important nerves and vessels on 
the back of thigh 
K,S SH Y Dissection, LGT, SGT, 
Demonstration 
Written/ Viva 
voce/ skill 
assessment 
 
AN16.6 Describe and demonstrate the bou ndaries, roof, floor, contents and 
relations of popliteal fossa with its clinical anatomy 
K,S SH Y Dissection, LGT, SGT, 
Demonstration 
Written/ Viva 
voce/ skill 
assessment 
 
Topic 17: Hip Joint Number o f Competencies (3) Number o f competencies for certification: (NIL)  
AN17.1 Describe and demonstrate the type, articular surfaces, capsule,  
synovial membrane, ligaments, relations, movements and muscles 
involved, blood and nerve supply, bursae around the hip joint 
K,S SH Y Dissection, LGT, SGT, 
Demonstration 
Written/ Viva 
voce/ skill 
assessment

44 
Number COMPETENCY 
The student should be able to 
Predominant 
Domain 
K/S/A/C 
Level 
K/KH/S 
H/P 
Core 
(Y/N) 
Suggested Teaching 
Learning method 
Suggested Assessment 
method 
Number 
required 
to certify 
P 
AN17.2 Describe anatomical basis of complications of fracture neckof femur K K H N LGT, Demonstration Written/ Viva 
voce 
 
AN17.3 Describe dislocation of h ip joint and surgical hip replacement K K H N LGT, Demonstration Written/ Viva 
voce 
 
Topic 18: Knee joint, Anterior compartment of leg & dorsum of foot Number o f Competencies (7) Number of competencies for certification: (NIL)  
AN18.1 Describe and demonstrate major muscles of anterior compartment of 
leg with their attachment, nerve supply and actions 
K,S SH Y Dissection, LGT, SGT, 
Demonstration 
Written/ Viva 
voce/ skill 
assessment 
 
AN18.2 D e s c r i b e  a n d  d e m o n s t r a t e  o r i g i n ,  c o u r s e ,  r e l a t i o n s ,  b r a n c h e s  ( or 
tributaries), termination of imp ortant nerves and vessels of an terior 
compartment of leg 
K,S SH Y Dissection, LGT, SGT, 
Demonstration 
Written/ Viva 
voce/ skill 
assessment 
 
AN18.3 Explain the anatomical basis of foot drop K K H Y LGT, Demonstration Written/ Viva 
voce 
 
AN18.4 D e s c r i b e  a n d  d e m o n s t r a t e  t h e  t y p e ,  a r t i c u l a r  s u r f a c e s ,  c a p s u l e , 
synovial membrane, ligaments, re lations, movements and muscles 
involved, nerve supply, bursae around the knee joint along with  
anastomosis around the knee joint 
K,S SH Y Dissection, LGT, SGT, 
Demonstration 
Written/ Viva 
voce/ skill 
assessment 
 
AN18.5 Explain the anatomical basis of locking and unlocking of the knee joint K K H Y LGT, Demonstration, 
Practical 
Written/ Viva 
voce 
 
AN18.6 Describe knee joint injuries with its applied anatomy K K H N LGT, Demonstration Written/ Viva 
voce 
 
AN18.7 Explain anatomical basis of Osteoarthritis K K H N LGT Written/ Viva 
voce 
 
Topic 19: Back of Leg & Sole Number o f Competencies (7) Number of competencies for certification: (NIL)  
AN19.1 Describe and demonstrate the major muscles of back of leg with their 
attachment, nerve supply and actions 
K,S SH Y Dissection, LGT, SGT, 
Demonstration 
Written/ Viva 
voce/ skill 
assessment

45 
Number COMPETENCY 
The student should be able to 
Predominant 
Domain 
K/S/A/C 
Level 
K/KH/S 
H/P 
Core 
(Y/N) 
Suggested Teaching 
Learning method 
Suggested Assessment 
method 
Number 
required 
to certify 
P 
AN19.2 Describe and demonstrate the origin, course, relations, branches 
(or tributaries), termination of important nerves and vessels o f 
back of leg 
K,S SH Y Dissection, LGT, SGT, 
Demonstration 
Written/ Viva 
voce/ skill 
assessment 
 
AN19.3 Explain the concept of “Peripheral heart” K K H Y LGT Written/ Viva 
voce 
 
AN19.4 Explain the anatomical basis of rupture of calcaneal tendon K K H N LGT Written/ Viva 
voce 
 
AN19.5 Describe factors maintaining importance arches of the foot with its 
importance 
K K H Y LGT Written/ Viva 
voce 
 
AN19.6 Explain the anatomical basis of Flat foot& Club foot K K H N LGT Written/ Viva 
voce 
 
AN19.7 Explain the anatomical basis of Metatarsalgia & Plantar fasciitis K K H N LGT Written/ Viva 
voce 
 
Topic 20: General Features, Joints, radiographs& surface marking Number of Competencies (10) Number of competencies for  certification: (NIL) 
AN20.1 Describe and demonstrate the type, articular surfaces, capsule,  
synovial membrane, ligaments, re lations, movements and muscles 
involved, blood and nerve supply of tibiofibular and ankle joint 
K,S SH Y Dissection, LGT, SGT, 
Demonstration, Practical 
Written/ Viva 
voce/ skill 
assessment 
 
AN20.2 Describe the subtalar and transverse tarsal joints K K H N LGT, Demonstration Written/ Viva 
voce 
 
AN20.3 Describe and demonstrate Fascia lata, Venous drainage, 
Lymphatic drainage, Retinacula & Dermatomes of lower limb 
K,S SH Y LGT, Demonstration, 
Dissection, Practical 
Written/ Viva 
voce/ skill 
assessment 
 
AN20.4 Explain anatomical basis of enlarged inguinal lymph nodes K K H N LGT Written/ Viva 
voce 
 
AN20.5 Explain anatomical basis of varicose veins and deep vein thrombosis K K H Y LGT, Demonstration Written/ Viva 
voce 
 
AN20.6 Identify the bones and joints of lower limb seen in anteroposterior 
and lateral view radiographs of various regions of lower limb 
K/S SH Y LGT, SGT, Demonstration Viva voce/ skill 
assessment

46 
Number COMPETENCY 
The student should be able to 
Predominant 
Domain 
K/S/A/C 
Level 
K/KH/S 
H/P 
Core 
(Y/N) 
Suggested Teaching 
Learning method 
Suggested Assessment 
method 
Number 
required 
to certify 
P 
AN20.7 Identify & demonstrate important bony landmarks of lower limb: - 
Vertebral levels of highest point of iliac crest, posterior sup erior iliac 
spines, iliac tubercle, pubic tubercle, ischial tuberosity, add uctor 
tubercle, 
-Tibial tuberosity, head of fibula, 
-Medial and lateral malleoli, Condyles of femur and tibia, 
sustentaculum tali, tuberosity of fifth metatarsal, tuberosity of 
the navicular 
K,S SH Y Practical, LGT, SGT, 
Demonstration 
Viva voce/ skill 
assessment 
 
AN20.8 Identify & demonstrate palpation of femoral, popliteal, posteri or 
tibial, anterior tibial & dorsalis pedis arteries in a simulate d 
environment 
K,S SH Y Practical, LGT, SGT, 
Demonstration 
Viva voce/ skill 
assessment 
 
AN20.9 Demonstrate surface projection o f: femoral, popliteal, dorsalis  pedis, 
post tibial arteries, Mid inguinal point, femoral nerve, Saphen ous 
opening, Sciatic, tibial, common peroneal & deep peroneal nerve, Great 
and small saphenous veins 
K,S SH Y Practical, LGT, SGT, 
Demonstration 
Viva voce/ skill 
assessment 
 
AN20.10 Describe basic concept of development of lower limb K K H N LGT Viva voce  
Topic 21: Thoracic cage Number o f Competencies (11) Number o f competencies for certification: (NIL) 
AN21.1 Identify and describe the salient features of sternum, typical riband 
typical thoracic vertebra. 
K,S SH Y LGT, Dissection, 
Practical, Demonstration 
Viva voce/ skill 
assessment 
 
AN21.2 Identify & describe the features of atypical ribs and atypical thoracic 
vertebrae. 
K,S SH N LGT, Dissection, 
Practical, Demonstration 
Viva voce/ skill 
assessment 
 
AN21.3 Describe & demonstrate the boundaries of thoracic inlet, cavity 
and outlet along with its applied aspect.( Thoracic inlet 
Syndrome) 
K/S SH Y LGT, Demonstration Written/ Viva 
voce/ skill 
assessment

47 
Number COMPETENCY 
The student should be able to 
Predominant 
Domain 
K/S/A/C 
Level 
K/KH/S 
H/P 
Core 
(Y/N) 
Suggested Teaching 
Learning method 
Suggested Assessment 
method 
Number 
required 
to certify 
P 
AN21.4 Describe & demonstrate extent, attachments, direction of fibres, nerve 
supply and actions of intercostal muscles 
K,S SH Y LGT, Dissection, 
Practical, Demonstration 
Written/ Viva 
voce/ skill 
assessment 
 
AN21.5 Describe & demonstrate origin, course, relations and branches of a typical 
intercostal nerve 
K,S SH Y LGT, Dissection, 
Practical, Demonstration 
Written/ Viva 
voce/ skill 
assessment 
 
AN21.6 Mention origin, course and branches/ tributaries of:
1) anterior & posterior intercostal vessels 
2) internal thoracic vessels 
K K H Y LGT, Dissection, 
Practical, Demonstration 
Written/ Viva 
voce 
 
AN21.7 Mention the origin, course, relations and branches of
1) atypical intercostal nerve 
2) superior intercostal artery, subcostal artery 
K K H N LGT, Dissection, 
Practical, Demonstration 
Written  
AN21.8 D e s c r i b e  &  d e m o n s t r a t e  t y p e ,  a r t i c u l a r  s u r f a c e s  &  m o v e m e n t s  o f  
manubriosternal, costovertebral,  costotransverse and xiphistern al 
joints 
K,S SH N LGT, Demonstration, 
Dissection, Practical 
Written/ Viva 
voce/ skill 
assessment 
 
AN21.9 Describe & demonstrate mechanics and types of respiration K, SS H Y Demonstration, 
Dissection, Practical 
Written/ Viva 
voce/ skill 
assessment 
 
AN21.10 Describe costochondr al and interchondral joints K K H N LGT, Demonstration, 
Dissection, Practical 
Written/ Viva 
voce 
 
AN21.11 Mention boundaries and contents of the superior, anterior, middle and 
posterior mediastinum 
K K H Y LGT, Demonstration, 
Dissection 
Written/ Viva 
voce 
 
Topic 22: Heart & Pericardium Number o f Competencies (7) Number o f competencies for certification: (NIL) 
AN22.1 Describe & demonstrate subdivisions, sinuses in pericardium, 
blood supply and nerve supply of pericardium 
K,S SH Y LGT, Demonstration, 
Dissection, Practical 
Written/ Viva 
voce/ skill 
assessment

48 
Number COMPETENCY 
The student should be able to 
Predominant 
Domain 
K/S/A/C 
Level 
K/KH/S 
H/P 
Core 
(Y/N) 
Suggested Teaching 
Learning method 
Suggested Assessment 
method 
Number 
required 
to certify 
P 
AN22.2 Describe & demonstrate external and internal features of each chamber 
of heart 
K,S SH Y LGT, Demonstration, 
Dissection, Practical 
Written/ Viva 
voce/ skill 
assessment 
 
AN22.3 Describe & demonstrate origin, course and branches of coronarya r t e r i e s  K , S S H Y LGT, Demonstration, 
Dissection, Practical 
Written/ Viva 
voce/ skill 
assessment 
 
AN22.4 Describe anatomical basis of ischaemic heart disease K K H Y LGT, Demonstration Written/ Viva 
voce 
 
AN22.5 Describe & demonstrate the formation, course, tributaries and 
termination of coronary sinus 
K,S SH Y LGT, Demonstration Written/ Viva 
voce/ skill 
assessment 
 
AN22.6 Describe the fibrous skeleton of heart K K H Y LGT Written  
AN22.7 Mention the parts, position and arterial supply of the conducting system 
of heart 
K K H Y LGT Written/ Viva 
voce 
 
Topic 23: Mediastinum Number o f Competencies (6) Number o f competencies for certification: (NIL) 
AN23.1 Describe & demonstrate the external appearance, relations, blood supply, 
nerve supply, lymphatic drainage and applied anatomy of oesopha gus 
K,S SH Y LGT, Demonstration Written/ Viva 
voce/ skill 
assessment 
 
AN23.2 Describe & demonstrate the extent, relations and tributaries of thoracic 
duct and enumerate its applied anatomy. 
K,S SH Y LGT Written/ Viva 
voce/ skill 
assessment 
 
AN23.3 Describe & demonstrate origin, course, relations, tributaries a nd 
termination of superior vena cava, azygos, hemiazygos andaccessory 
hemiazygos veins 
K,S SH Y LGT, Demonstration, 
Dissection, Practical 
Written/ Viva 
voce/ skill 
assessment 
 
AN23.4 Mention the extent, branches and relations of arch of aorta& descending 
thoracic aorta 
K K H Y LGT, Demonstration, 
Dissection, Practical 
Written/ Viva 
voce

49 
Number COMPETENCY 
The student should be able to 
Predominant 
Domain 
K/S/A/C 
Level 
K/KH/S 
H/P 
Core 
(Y/N) 
Suggested Teaching 
Learning method 
Suggested Assessment 
method 
Number 
required 
to certify 
P 
AN23.5 Identify & Mention the location and extent of thoracic sympathetic chain K,S SH Y LGT, Demonstration, 
Dissection, Practical 
Written/ Viva 
voce/ skill 
assessment 
 
AN23.6 Describe the splanchnic nerves K K H N LGT Written  
Topic 24: Lungs & Trachea Number o f Competencies (6) Number o f competencies for certification: (NIL) 
AN24.1 Mention the blood supply, lymphatic drainage and nerve supply of pleura, 
extent of pleura and describe the pleural recesses and their ap plied 
anatomy 
K K H Y LGT, Demonstration, 
Dissection, Practical 
Written/ Viva 
voce 
 
AN24.2 Identify side, external features and relations of structures which form 
root of lung & bronchial tree and their clinical correlate 
K,S SH Y LGT, Demonstration, 
Dissection, Practical 
Written/ Viva 
voce/ skill 
assessment 
 
AN24.3 Describe a bronchopulmonary segment with its clinical anatomy K K H Y LGT, Demonstration Written/ Viva 
voce 
 
AN24.4 Identify phrenic nerve & describe its formation& distribution K,S SH Y LGT, Demonstration Written/ Viva 
voce 
 
AN24.5 Mention the blood supply, lymphatic drainage and nerve supply of lungs K K H Y LGT, Demonstration, 
Dissection, Practical 
Written/ Viva 
voce 
 
AN24.6 Describethe extent, length, relations, bloodsupply, lymphatic drainageand 
nerve supply of trachea 
K K H N LGT, Demonstration Written  
Topic 25: Thorax Number o f Competencies (9) Number o f competencies for certification: (NIL) 
AN25.1 Identify, draw and label a slide of trachea and lung K,S SH Y LGT, Demonstration, 
Practical 
Written/ skill 
assessment 
 
AN25.2 Describe development of pleura, lung & heart K K H Y LGT Written  
AN25.3 Describe fetal circulation and changes occurring at birth K K H Y LGT, Demonstration Written

50 
Number COMPETENCY 
The student should be able to 
Predominant 
Domain 
K/S/A/C 
Level 
K/KH/S 
H/P 
Core 
(Y/N) 
Suggested Teaching 
Learning method 
Suggested Assessment 
method 
Number 
required 
to certify 
P 
AN25.4 Describe embryological basis of:
1) atrial septal defect, 2) ventricular septal defect, 3) Fallot’s tetralogy & 
4) tracheoesophageal fistula 
K K H Y LGT Written/ Viva 
voce 
 
AN25.5 Describe developmental basis of congenital anomalies, transposition 
of great vessels, dextrocardia, patent ductus arteriosus and 
coarctation of aorta 
K K H Y LGT Written/ Viva 
voce 
 
AN25.6 Mention development of ao rtic arch arteries, SVC, IVC and coronary sinus K K H N LGT Written/ Viva 
voce 
 
AN25.7 Identify structures seen on a plain x-ray chest (PA view) K,S SH Y LGT, Demonstration, 
Practical 
Written/ Viva 
voce 
 
AN25.8 Identify and describe in brief a barium swallow K,S SH N LGT, Demonstration, 
Practical 
Written/ Viva 
voce 
 
AN25.9 Demonstrate surface marking of lines of pleural reflection, lun g 
borders and fissures, trachea, heart borders, apex beat & surfa ce 
projection of valves of heart 
K,S SH Y Demonstration, Practical Viva voce/ skill 
assessment 
 
Topic 26: Skull osteology Number o f Competencies (7) Number o f competencies for certification: (NIL) 
AN26.1 Describe & demonstrate anatomical position of skull, Identify and locate 
individual skull bones in skull 
K,S SH Y LGT, Demonstration Viva voce/ skill 
assessment 
 
AN26.2 Describe & demonstrate the features of norma frontalis, verticalis, 
occipitalis, lateralis and basalis 
K,S SH Y LGT, Demonstration Viva voce/ skill 
assessment 
 
AN26.3 Describe & demonstrate cranial cavity, its subdivisions, foramina and 
structures passing through them 
K,S SH Y LGT, Demonstration Viva voce/ skill 
assessment 
 
AN26.4 Describe & demonstrate morphological features of mandible K ,S SH Y LGT, Demonstration Viva voce/ skill 
assessment 
 
AN26.5 Describe & demonstrate features of typical and atypical cervical vertebrae 
(atlas and axis) 
K,S SH Y LGT, Demonstration Viva voce/ skill 
assessment 
 
AN26.6 Explain the concept of bones that ossify in membrane K K H N LGT Viva voce

51 
Number COMPETENCY 
The student should be able to 
Predominant 
Domain 
K/S/A/C 
Level 
K/KH/S 
H/P 
Core 
(Y/N) 
Suggested Teaching 
Learning method 
Suggested Assessment 
method 
Number 
required 
to certify 
P 
AN26.7 Describe & demonstrate the features of the 7th cervical vertebra K,S SH N LGT, Demonstration Viva voce  
Topic 27: Scalp Number o f Competencies (2) Number o f competencies for certification: (NIL) 
AN27.1 Describe & demonstrate the layers of scalp, its blood supply, nerve supply and 
surgical importance. 
K,S SH Y LGT, Practical, 
Demonstration, 
Dissection 
Written/ Viva 
voce/ skill 
assessment 
 
AN27.2 Describe emissary veins with its role in the spread of infection 
from extracranial route to intracranial venous sinuses 
K K H Y LGT, Practical, 
Demonstration, 
Dissection 
Written  
Topic 28: Face & parotid region Number o f Competencies (10) Number o f competencies for certification: (NIL) 
AN28.1 Describe & demonstrate muscles of facial expression and their nerve 
supply 
K,S SH Y LGT, Practical, 
Demonstration, 
Dissection 
Written/ Viva 
voce/ skill 
assessment 
 
AN28.2 Describe sensory innervation of face K K H Y LGT, Demonstration Written/ Viva 
voce 
 
AN28.3 Describe & demonstrate origin /formation, course, branches /tributaries 
of facial vessels 
K,S SH Y LGT, Practical, 
Demonstration, 
Dissection 
Written/ Viva 
voce/ skill 
assessment 
 
AN28.4 Describe & demonstrate branches of facial nerve with distribution K,S SH Y LGT, Practical, 
Demonstration, 
Dissection 
Written/ Viva 
voce/ skill 
assessment 
 
AN28.5 Describe cervical lymph nodes and lymphatic drainage of head, face and 
neck 
K K H Y LGT Written/ Viva 
voce 
 
AN28.6 Identify superficial muscles of face, their nerve supply and actions K,S SH Y LGT, Practical, 
Demonstration, 
Dissection 
Written/ Viva 
voce/ skill 
assessment

52 
Number COMPETENCY 
The student should be able to 
Predominant 
Domain 
K/S/A/C 
Level 
K/KH/S 
H/P 
Core 
(Y/N) 
Suggested Teaching 
Learning method 
Suggested Assessment 
method 
Number 
required 
to certify 
P 
AN28.7 Explain the anatomical basis of facial nerve palsy K K H Y LGT Written  
AN28.8 Explain surgical importance of deep facial vein K K H Y LGT Written  
AN28.9 Describe & demonstrate the parts, borders, surfaces, contents, 
relations and nerve supply of parotid gland with course of its duct and 
surgical importance 
K,S SH Y LGT, Practical, 
Demonstration, 
Dissection 
Written/ Viva 
voce/ skill 
assessment 
 
AN28.10 Explain th e anatomical basis of Frey’s syndrome K K H N LGT Written  
Topic 29: Posterior triangle of neck Number of Competencies (5) Number o f competencies for certification: (NIL) 
AN29.1 Describe and demonstrate the boundaries, subdivisions and contents of 
posterior triangle of neck 
K, S SH Y LGT, Practical, 
Demonstration, 
Dissection 
Written/ Viva 
voce/ skill 
assessment 
 
AN29.2 Describe & demonstrate attachments, nerve supply, relations and actions 
of sternocleidomastoid 
K,S SH Y LGT, Practical, 
Demonstration, 
Dissection 
Written/ Viva 
voce/ skill 
assessment 
 
AN29.3 Explain anatomical basis of Erb’s & Klumpke’s palsy K K H Y LGT, Demonstration Written  
AN29.4 Explain anatomical basis of wry neck K K H N LGT, Demonstration Written  
AN29.5 Describe & demonstrate attachments of 1) inferior belly of omoh yoid, 
2)scalenus anterior, 3) scalenus medius & 4) levator scapulae 
K,S SH N LGT, Practical, 
Demonstration, 
Dissection 
Written/ Viva 
voce 
 
Topic: 30 Cranial cavity Number o f Competencies (5) Number o f competencies for certification: (NIL) 
AN30.1 Describe the cranial fossae & identify related structures K ,S SH Y LGT, Practical, 
Demonstration, 
Dissection 
Written/ Viva 
voce/ skill 
assessment

53 
Number COMPETENCY 
The student should be able to 
Predominant 
Domain 
K/S/A/C 
Level 
K/KH/S 
H/P 
Core 
(Y/N) 
Suggested Teaching 
Learning method 
Suggested Assessment 
method 
Number 
required 
to certify 
P 
AN30.2 Describe & identify major foramina with structures passing through them K,S SH Y LGT, Practical, 
Demonstration, 
Dissection 
Written/ Viva 
voce/ skill 
assessment 
 
AN30.3 Describe & identify dural folds & dural venous sinuses K,S SH Y LGT, Practical, 
Demonstration, 
Dissection 
Written/ Viva 
voce/ skill 
assessment 
 
AN30.4 Describe clinical importance of dural venous sinuses K K H Y LGT Written  
AN30.5 Explain effect of pituitary tumours on visual pathway K K H N LGT Written  
Topic 31: Orbit Number o f Competencies (5) Number o f competencies for certification: (NIL) 
AN31.1 Describe & identify extra ocular muscles of eyeball, along with a note 
on its attachment, action and clinical anatomy 
K,S SH Y LGT, Practical, 
Demonstration, 
Dissection 
Written/ Viva 
voce/ skill 
assessment 
 
AN31.2 Describe & demonstrate nerves and vessels in the orbit K,S SH Y LGT, Practical, 
Demonstration, 
Dissection 
Written/ Viva 
voce/ skill 
assessment 
 
AN31.3 Describe anatomical basis of Horner’s syndrome K K H N LGT Written  
AN31.4 Describe the components of lacrimal apparatus K K H Y LGT Written  
AN31.5 Explain the anatomical basis o f oculomotor, trochlear and 
abducent nerve palsies along with strabismus 
K K H Y LGT Written  
Topic 32: Anterior Triangle Number o f Competencies (2) Number o f competencies for certification: (NIL) 
AN32.1 Describe boundaries and subdivisions of anterior triangle K K H Y LGT Written/ Viva 
voce

54 
Number COMPETENCY 
The student should be able to 
Predominant 
Domain 
K/S/A/C 
Level 
K/KH/S 
H/P 
Core 
(Y/N) 
Suggested Teaching 
Learning method 
Suggested Assessment 
method 
Number 
required 
to certify 
P 
AN32.2 Describe & demonstrate boundaries and contents of muscular, 
carotid, digastric and submental triangles 
K,S SH Y LGT, Practical, 
Demonstration, 
Dissection 
Written/ Viva 
voce/ skill 
assessment 
 
Topic 33: Temporal and Infratemporal regions Number o f Competencies (5) Number o f competencies for certification: (NIL) 
AN33.1 Describe & demonstrate extent, boundaries and contents of temporal and 
infratemporal fossae 
K,S SH Y LGT, Practical, 
Demonstration, 
Dissection 
Written/ Viva 
voce/ skill 
assessment 
 
AN33.2 Describe & demonstrate attachments, direction of fibres, nerve 
supply and actions of muscles of mastication 
K,S SH Y LGT, Practical, 
Demonstration, 
Dissection 
Written/ Viva 
voce/ skill 
assessment 
 
AN33.3 Describe & demonstrate articulating surface, type& movements of 
temporomandibular joint 
K,S SH Y LGT, Practical, 
Demonstration, 
Dissection 
Written/ Viva 
voce/ skill 
assessment 
 
AN33.4 Explain the clinical significance of pterygoid venous plexus K K H Y LGT Written  
AN33.5 Describe the features of dislocation of temporomandibular joint K K H N LGT Written  
Topic 34: Submandibular region Number o f Competencies (3) Number o f competencies for certification: (NIL) 
AN34.1 Describe and demonstrate the superficial and deep structures, muscles, 
nerves, vessels, and glands in the submandibular region 
K,S SH Y LGT, Dissection, 
Practical, Demonstration 
Written/Viva/ Skill 
Assessment 
 
AN34.2 Describe & demonstrate the morphology, relations and nerve supply of 
submandibular salivary gland & submandibularganglion 
K,S SH Y LGT, Practical, 
Demonstration, 
Dissection 
Written/ Viva 
voce/ skill 
assessment 
 
AN34.3 Describe the basis of f ormation of submandibular stones K K H N LGT Written  
Topic 35: Deep structures in the neck Number of Competencies (10) Number o f competencies for certification: (NIL) 
AN35.1 Describe the parts, extent, attachments, modifications of deep cervical 
fascia 
K K H Y LGT Written

55 
Number COMPETENCY 
The student should be able to 
Predominant 
Domain 
K/S/A/C 
Level 
K/KH/S 
H/P 
Core 
(Y/N) 
Suggested Teaching 
Learning method 
Suggested Assessment 
method 
Number 
required 
to certify 
P 
AN35.2 Describe & demonstrate location,  p a r t s ,  b o r d e r s ,  s u r f a c e s ,  r e l ations, 
blood supply & applied anatomy of thyroid gland. Also describe the 
parathyroid glands in brief. 
K,S SH Y LGT, Practical, 
Demonstration, 
Dissection 
Written/ Viva 
voce/ skill 
assessment 
 
AN35.3 Demonstrate & describe the origin, parts, course & branches subclavian 
artery 
K,S SH Y LGT, Practical, 
Demonstration, 
Dissection 
Written/ Viva 
voce/ skill 
assessment 
 
AN35.4 Describe & demonstrate origin, course, relations, tributaries and 
termination of internal jugular & brachiocephalic veins 
K,S SH Y LGT, Practical, 
Demonstration, 
Dissection 
Written/ Viva 
voce/ skill 
assessment 
 
AN35.5 Describe and demonstrate extent, drainage& applied anatomy of cervical 
lymph nodes 
K,S SH Y LGT, Practical, 
Demonstration, 
Dissection 
Written/ Viva 
voce/ skill 
assessment 
 
AN35.6 Describe and demonstrate the extent, formation, relation & branches of 
cervical sympathetic chain 
K,S SH Y LGT, Practical, 
Demonstration, 
Dissection 
Written/ Viva 
voce/ skill 
assessment 
 
AN35.7 Describe the course and branches of IX, X, XI& XII nerve in the neck K K H Y LGT Written  
AN35.8 Describe the anatomically relevant clinical features of Thyroid swellings K K H N LGT, Demonstration Written  
AN35.9 Describe the clinical features of  compression of subclavian art ery and 
lower trunk of brachial plexus by cervical rib 
K K H N LGT Written  
AN35.10 Describe the fascial spaces of neck K K H N LGT Written  
Topic 36: Mouth, Pharynx & Palate Number o f Competencies (7) Number o f competencies for certification: (NIL) 
AN36.1 Describe and demonstrate the structures of the vestibule of the mouth 
and oral cavity proper. 
K,S SH Y LGT, Practical, 
Demonstration, 
Dissection 
Written/ Viva 
voce/ skill 
assessment

56 
Number COMPETENCY 
The student should be able to 
Predominant 
Domain 
K/S/A/C 
Level 
K/KH/S 
H/P 
Core 
(Y/N) 
Suggested Teaching 
Learning method 
Suggested Assessment 
method 
Number 
required 
to certify 
P 
AN36.2 Describe the 1) morphology, relations, blood supply andapplied 
anatomy of palatine tonsil 2) composition of soft palate 
K K H Y LGT, Practical, 
Demonstration, 
Dissection 
Written  
AN36.3 Describe and demonstrate the muscles, nerve supply, blood supply 
and lymphatic drainage of the pharynx 
K,S SH Y LGT, Practical, 
Demonstration, 
Dissection 
Written/ Viva 
voce/ skill 
assessment 
 
AN36.4 Describe the components and functions of Waldeyer’s lymphatic ring K K H Y LGT Written  
AN36.5 Describe the pharyngeal spaces. Also describe the boundaries and 
clinical significance of pyriform fossa 
K K H N LGT Written  
AN36.6 Describe the anatomical basis of tonsillitis, tonsillectomy, adenoids and 
peri-tonsillar abscess 
K K H N LGT Written  
AN36.7 Describe the clinical significance of Killian’s dehiscence K K H N LGT Written  
Topic 37: Cavity of Nose Number of Competencies (3) Number o f competencies for certification: (NIL) 
AN37.1 Describe & demonstrate features of nasal septum, lateral wall of nose, 
their blood supply and nerve supply 
K,S SH Y LGT, Practical, 
Demonstration, 
Dissection 
Written/ Viva 
voce/ skill 
assessment 
 
AN37.2 Describe location and functional anatomy of paranasal sinuses K K H Y LGT, Practical, 
Demonstration 
Written  
AN37.3 Describe anatomical basis of sinusitis & maxillary sinus tumours K K H N LGT Written  
Topic 38: Larynx Number o f Competencies (3) Number o f competencies for certification: (NIL) 
AN38.1 Describe & demonstrate the morphology, identify structure of the wall, 
nerve supply, blood supply and actions of intrinsic and extrins ic 
muscles of the larynx 
K,S SH Y LGT, Practical, 
Demonstration, 
Dissection 
Written/ Viva 
voce/ skill 
assessment 
 
AN38.2 Describe the anatom ical aspects of laryngitis K K H N LGT Written

57 
Number COMPETENCY 
The student should be able to 
Predominant 
Domain 
K/S/A/C 
Level 
K/KH/S 
H/P 
Core 
(Y/N) 
Suggested Teaching 
Learning method 
Suggested Assessment 
method 
Number 
required 
to certify 
P 
AN38.3 Describe anatomical basis of recurrent laryngeal nerve injury K K H N LGT Written  
Topic 39: Tongue Number o f Competencies (2) Number o f competencies for certification: (NIL) 
AN39.1 Describe & demonstrate the morphology, nerve supply, 
embryological basis of nerve supply, blood supply, lymphatic 
drainage and actions of extrinsic and intrinsic muscles of tongue 
K,S SH Y LGT, Practical, 
Demonstration, 
Dissection 
Written/ Viva 
voce/ skill 
assessment 
 
AN39.2 Explain the anatomical basis of hypoglossal nerve palsy K K H N LGT Written  
Topic 40: Organs of hearing and equilibrium Number o f Competencies (5) Number o f competencies for certification: (NIL) 
AN40.1 Describe & identify the parts, blood supply and nerve supplyof external ear K,S SH Y LGT, Practical, 
Demonstration, 
Dissection 
Written/ Viva 
voce/ skill 
assessment 
 
AN40.2 D e s c r i b e  &  d e m o n s t r a t e  t h e  b o u n d a r i e s ,  c o n t e n t s ,  r e l a t i o n s  a n d  
functional anatomy of middle ear and auditory tube 
K,S SH Y LGT, Practical, 
Demonstration, 
Dissection 
Written/ Viva 
voce/ skill 
assessment 
 
AN40.3 Describe the features of internal ear K K H N LGT Written  
AN40.4 Explain anatomical basis of otitis externa and otitis media K K H N LGT Written  
AN40.5 Explain anatomical basis of myringotomy K K H N LGT Written  
Topic 41: Eyeball Number o f Competencies (3) Number o f competencies for certification: (NIL) 
AN41.1 Describe & demonstrate parts and layers of eyeball K,S SH Y LGT, Practical, 
Demonstration, 
Dissection 
Written/ Viva 
voce/ skill 
assessment 
 
AN41.2 Describe the anatomical aspects of cataract, glaucoma& central retinal 
artery occlusion 
K K H N LGT Written  
AN41.3 Describe the position, nerve supply and actions of intraocular muscles K K H N LGT, Practical, 
Demonstration 
Written

58 
Number COMPETENCY 
The student should be able to 
Predominant 
Domain 
K/S/A/C 
Level 
K/KH/S 
H/P 
Core 
(Y/N) 
Suggested Teaching 
Learning method 
Suggested Assessment 
method 
Number 
required 
to certify 
P 
Topic 42: Back Region Number o f Competencies (3) Number o f competencies for certification: (NIL) 
AN42.1 Describe and demonstrate the contents of the vertebral canalK , S S H Y LGT, Practical, 
Demonstration, 
Dissection 
Written/ Viva 
voce/ skill 
assessment 
 
AN42.2 Describe & demonstrate the boundaries and contents of Suboccipital 
triangle 
K,S SH Y LGT, Practical, 
Demonstration, 
Dissection 
Written/ Viva 
voce/ skill 
assessment 
 
AN42.3 Describe the position, direction of fibres, relations, nerve supply, 
actions of semispinalis capitis and splenius capitis 
K K H N LGT Written  
Topic 43: Head & neck Joints, Histology, Development, Radiography& Surface marking Number of Competencies (9) Number of competencies for certification: (NIL) 
AN43.1 Describe & demonstrate the movements with muscles producing the 
movements of atlantooccipital joint & atlantoaxial joint 
K,S SH Y LGT, Practical, 
Demonstration, 
Dissection 
Written/ Viva 
voce/ skill 
assessment 
 
AN43.2 Identify, describe and draw the microanatomy of pituitary gland , 
thyroid, parathyroid gland, tongue, salivary glands, tonsil, epiglottis, 
cornea, retina 
K,S SH Y LGT, Practical Written/ skill 
assessment 
 
AN43.3 Identify, describe and draw microanatomy of olfactory epitheliu m, 
eyelid, lip, sclero-corneal junction, optic nerve, cochlea- organ of corti, 
pineal gland 
K,S SH N LGT, Practical Written/ skill 
assessment 
 
AN43.4 Describe the development and developmental basis of congenital 
anomalies of face, palate, tongue, branchial apparatus, pituitary gland, 
thyroid gland & eye 
K K H Y LGT Written/ Viva 
voce

59 
Number COMPETENCY 
The student should be able to 
Predominant 
Domain 
K/S/A/C 
Level 
K/KH/S 
H/P 
Core 
(Y/N) 
Suggested Teaching 
Learning method 
Suggested Assessment 
method 
Number 
required 
to certify 
P 
AN43.5 Demonstrate- 1) Testing of muscles of facial expression, extrao cular
muscles, muscles of mastication, 
2) Palpation of carotid arteries, facial artery, superficial te mporal 
artery, 3) Location of internal and external jugular veins, 4) Location 
of hyoid bone, thyroid cartilage and cricoid cartilage with the ir 
vertebral levels 
K,S SH Y Practical, Demonstration Viva voce/ skill 
assessment 
 
AN43.6 Demonstrate surface projection of- Thyroid gland, Parotid gland and duct, 
Pterion, Common carotid artery, Internal jugular vein, Subclavi an vein, 
External jugular vein, Facial artery in the face & accessory ne rve 
K,S SH N Practical, Demonstration Viva voce/ skill 
assessment 
 
AN43.7 Identify the anatomical structures in 1) Plain x-ray skull, 2) AP view 
and lateral view 3) Plain x-ray cervical spine-AP and lateral v iew 4) 
Plain x- ray of paranasal sinuses 
K,S SH Y Practical, Demonstration Viva voce/ skill 
assessment 
 
AN43.8 Describe the anatomical route used for carotid angiogram and vertebral 
angiogram 
K K H N LGT Viva voce/ skill 
assessment 
 
AN43.9 Identify anatomical structures in carotid angiogram and vertebral 
angiogram 
K,S SH N Practical, Demonstration Viva voce/ skill 
assessment 
 
Topic 44: Anterior abdominal wall Number o f Competencies (7) Number o f competencies for certification: (NIL) 
AN44.1 Describe & demonstrate the Planes (transpyloric, transtubercula r, 
subcostal, lateral vertical, linea alba, linea semilunaris), re gions & 
Quadrants of abdomen 
K,S SH Y LGT, Practical, 
Demonstration, 
Dissection 
Written/ Viva 
voce/ skill 
assessment 
 
AN44.2 Describe & identify the Fascia, nerves & blood vessels of anterior 
abdominal wall 
K,S SH Y LGT, Practical, 
Demonstration, 
Dissection 
Written/ Viva 
voce/ skill 
assessment 
 
AN44.3 Describe the formation of rectus sheath and its contents K K H Y LGT, Practical, 
Demonstration, 
Written/ Viva 
voce

60 
Number COMPETENCY 
The student should be able to 
Predominant 
Domain 
K/S/A/C 
Level 
K/KH/S 
H/P 
Core 
(Y/N) 
Suggested Teaching 
Learning method 
Suggested Assessment 
method 
Number 
required 
to certify 
P 
AN44.4 Describe & demonstrate extent, boundaries, contents of Inguinal canal 
including Hesselbach’s triangle. 
K,S SH Y LGT, Practical, 
Demonstration, 
Dissection 
Written/ Viva 
voce/ skill 
assessment 
 
AN44.5 Explain the anatomical basis of inguinal hernia. K K H Y LGT Written/ Viva 
voce 
 
AN44.6 Describe & demonstrate attachments of muscles of anterior abdominal 
wall 
K,S SH Y LGT, Practical, 
Demonstration, 
Dissection 
Written/ Viva 
voce/ skill 
assessment 
 
AN44.7 Describe common abdominal incisions with example and their clinical 
importance 
K K H N LGT Written  
Topic 45: Posterior abdominal wall Number o f Competencies (3) Number of competencies for certification: (NIL) 
AN45.1 Describe Thoracolumbar fascia, its different layers, their attachments and 
extents 
K K H Y LGT Written  
AN45.2 Describe & demonstrate Lumbar plexus, its root value, formation, 
branches and clinical anatomy (compression/ injury to the rootlets 
of lumber plexus) 
K,S SH Y LGT, Practical, 
Demonstration, 
Dissection 
Written/ Viva 
voce/ skill 
assessment 
 
AN45.3 Describe and demonstrate back muscles, nerve supply and action K K H N LGT Written  
Topic 46: Male external genitalia Number o f Competencies (5) Number of competencies for certification: (NIL) 
AN46.1 Describe & demonstrate coverings, internal structure, side 
determination, blood supply, nerve supply, lymphatic drainage &  
descent of testis with its applied anatomy 
K,S SH Y Dissection, LGT, SGT, 
DOAP 
Written/ Viva 
voce/ skill 
assessment 
 
AN46.2 Describe parts of Epididymis K K H Y LGT, Dissection Written/ Viva 
voce 
 
AN46.3 Describe Penis under following headings: (parts, components, bloodsupply 
and lymphatic drainage) 
K K H Y LGT, Dissection Written/ Viva 
voce 
 
AN46.4 Explain the anatomical basis of Varicocele K K H N LGT Written

61 
Number COMPETENCY 
The student should be able to 
Predominant 
Domain 
K/S/A/C 
Level 
K/KH/S 
H/P 
Core 
(Y/N) 
Suggested Teaching 
Learning method 
Suggested Assessment 
method 
Number 
required 
to certify 
P 
AN46.5 Explain the anatomical basis of Phimosis & Circumcision K K H N LGT Written  
Topic 47: Abdominal cavity Number o f Competencies (14) Number o f competencies for certification: (NIL)(NIL) 
AN47.1 Describe & demonstrate horizontal and vertical tracing of peritoneum. 
Also describe boundaries and recesses of Lesser & Greater sac. 
K,S SH Y LGT, Practical, 
Demonstration, 
Dissection 
Written/ Viva 
voce/ skill 
assessment 
 
AN47.2 Name & identify various peritoneal folds & pouches with its explanation 
 
. 
K,S SH Y LGT, Practical, 
Demonstration, 
Dissection 
Written/ Viva 
voce/ skill 
assessment 
 
AN47.3 Explain anatomical basis of Ascites & Peritonitis K K H N LGT Written  
AN47.4 Explain anatomical basis of Subphrenic abscess K K H N LGT Written  
AN47.5 Describe & demonstrate major viscera of abdomen under following  
headings (anatomical position, e xternal and internal features, 
important peritoneal and other relations, blood supply, nerve supply, 
lymphatic drainage and applied aspects) 
K,S SH Y Dissection, LGT, SGT, 
DOAP 
Written/ Viva 
voce/ skill 
assessment 
 
AN47.6 Explain the anatomical basis of Splenic notch, Accessory spleens, Kehr’s 
sign, Different types of vagotomy, Liver biopsy (site of needle puncture), 
Referred pain in cholecystitis, Obstructive jaundice, Referred pain 
around umbilicus, Radiating pain of kidney to groin & Lymphatic spread 
in carcinoma stomach 
K K H N LGT Written  
AN47.7 Demonstrate boundaries of Calot' s triangle and mention its clinical
importance 
K K H N LGT Written  
AN47.8 Describe & identify the formation, course relations and tributaries of 
Portal vein, Inferior vena cava & Renal vein 
K,S SH Y LGT, Practical, 
Demonstration, 
Dissection 
Written/ Viva 
voce/ skill 
assessment

62 
Number COMPETENCY 
The student should be able to 
Predominant 
Domain 
K/S/A/C 
Level 
K/KH/S 
H/P 
Core 
(Y/N) 
Suggested Teaching 
Learning method 
Suggested Assessment 
method 
Number 
required 
to certify 
P 
AN47.9 Describe & identify the origin, course, important relations and  
branches of Abdominal aorta, Coeliac trunk, Superior mesenteric , 
Inferior mesenteric & Common iliac artery 
K,S SH Y LGT, Practical, 
Demonstration, 
Dissection 
Written/ Viva 
voce/ skill 
assessment 
 
AN47.10 Describe sites of portosystemic anastomosis, describe its appli ed 
anatomy andanatomical correlations 
K K H Y LGT Written  
AN47.11 Explain the anatomic basis of hematemesis& caput medusae in portal 
hypertension 
K K H Y LGT, Written/ Viva 
voce 
 
AN47.12 Describe important nerve plexuses of posterior abdominal wall K K H N LGT Written  
AN47.13 Describe & demonstrate the attachments, openings, nerve supply & 
action of the thoracoabdominal diaphragm 
K,S SH Y Dissection, LGT, SGT, 
DOAP 
Written/ Viva 
voce/ skill 
assessment 
 
AN47.14 Describe the abnormal openings of thoracoabdominal diaphragm and 
diaphragmatic hernia 
K K H N LGT Written  
Topic 48: Pelvic wall and viscera Number o f Competencies (8) Number o f competencies for certification: (NIL) 
AN48.1 Describe & demonstrate the position, features, important peritoneal and 
other relations, blood supply, nerve supply, lymphatic drainage  a n d  
clinical aspects of important male & female pelvic viscera. 
K,S SH Y Dissection, LGT, SGT, 
DOAP 
Written/ Viva 
voce/ skill 
assessment 
 
AN48.2 Describe & identify the muscles of Pelvic diaphragm. K,S SH Y Dissection, LGT, SGT, 
DOAP 
Written/ Viva 
voce/ skill 
assessment 
 
AN48.3 Describe & demonstrate the origin, course, important relations and 
branches of internal iliac artery 
K,S SH Y Dissection, LGT, SGT, 
DOAP 
Written/ Viva 
voce/ skill 
assessment 
 
AN48.4 Describe the branches of sacral plexus K K H Y LGT Written

63 
Number COMPETENCY 
The student should be able to 
Predominant 
Domain 
K/S/A/C 
Level 
K/KH/S 
H/P 
Core 
(Y/N) 
Suggested Teaching 
Learning method 
Suggested Assessment 
method 
Number 
required 
to certify 
P 
AN48.5 Explain the anatomical basis of suprapubic cystostomy, Urinary 
obstruction in benign prostatic hypertrophy, Retroverted uterus , 
Prolapse uterus, Internal and ex ternal haemorrhoids, Anal fistu la, 
Vasectomy, Tubal pregnancy & Tubal ligation 
K K H N LGT Written  
AN48.6 Describe the neurological basis of Automatic bladder K K H Y LGT Written  
AN48.7 Mention the lobes involved in benign prostatic hypertrophy& prostatic 
cancer 
K K H N LGT Written  
AN48.8 Mention the structures palpable during vaginal & rectal examination K K H N LGT Written  
Topic 49: Perineum Number o f Competencies (5) Number o f competencies for certification: (NIL) 
AN49.1 Describe& demonstrate the superficial& deep perineal pouch (boundaries
and contents) 
K,S SH Y Dissection, LGT, SGT, 
DOAP 
Written/ Viva 
voce/ skill 
 
AN49.2 Describe & identify Perineal body K,S SH Y Dissection, LGT, SGT, 
DOAP 
Written/ Viva 
voce/ skill 
assessment 
 
AN49.3 Describe & demonstrate Perineal membrane in male& female K,S SH Y Dissection, LGT, SGT, 
DOAP 
Written/ Viva 
voce/ skill 
assessment 
 
AN49.4 Describe & demonstrate boundaries, content & applied anatomy of 
Ischiorectal fossa 
K,S SH Y Dissection, LGT, SGT, 
DOAP 
Written/ Viva 
voce/ skill 
assessment 
 
AN49.5 Explain the anatomical basis of Perineal tear, Episiotomy, Perianal abscess 
and Anal fissure 
K K H N LGT Written  
Topic 50: Vertebral column Number o f Competencies (4) Number o f competencies for certification: (NIL) 
AN50.1 Describe the curvatures of the vertebral column K K H Y LGT Written/ Viva 
voce

64 
Number COMPETENCY 
The student should be able to 
Predominant 
Domain 
K/S/A/C 
Level 
K/KH/S 
H/P 
Core 
(Y/N) 
Suggested Teaching 
Learning method 
Suggested Assessment 
method 
Number 
required 
to certify 
P 
AN50.2 D e s c r i b e  &  d e m o n s t r a t e  t h e  t y p e ,  a r t i c u l a r  e n d s ,  l i g a m e n t s  a n d  
movements of Intervertebral joints, Sacroiliac joints & Pubic 
symphysis 
K,S SH Y Dissection, LGT, SGT, 
DOAP 
Written/ Viva 
voce/ skill 
assessment 
 
AN50.3 Describe lumbar puncture (site, direction of the needle, structures pierced
during the lumbar puncture) 
K K H Y LGT Written/ Viva 
voce 
 
AN50.4 Explain the anatomical basis of Sc oliosis, Lordosis, Prolapsed disc, 
Spondylolisthesis & Spina bifida 
K K H N LGT Written  
Topic 51: Sectional Anatomy Number o f Competencies (2) Number of competencies for certification: (NIL) 
AN51.1 Describe & identify the cross-section at the level of T8, T10 and L1 
(transpyloric plane) 
K,S SH Y Dissection, LGT, SGT, 
DOAP 
Written/ Viva 
voce/ skill 
assessment 
 
AN51.2 Describe & identify the midsagittal section of male and femalep e l v i s K S H Y Dissection, LGT, SGT, 
DOAP 
Written/ Viva 
voce/ skill 
assessment 
 
Topic 52: Histology & Embryology Number o f Competencies (8) Number o f competencies for certification: (NIL) 
AN52.1 Describe & identify the microanatomical features of Gastro-inte stinal
system: 
Oesophagus, Fundus of stomach, Pylorus of stomach, Duodenum, 
Jejunum, Ileum, Large intestine, Appendix, Liver, Gall bladder, Pancreas 
& Suprarenal gland 
K,S SH Y LGT, Demonstration, 
Practical 
Written/ skill 
assessment 
 
AN52.2 Describe & identify the microanatomical features of: Urinary sy stem: 
Kidney, Ureter & Urinary bladder 
Male Reproductive System: Testis, Epididymis, Vas deferens, Prostate & 
penis 
Female reproductive system: Ovary, Uterus, Uterine tube, Cervix, Placenta 
& Umbilical cord 
K,S SH Y LGT, Demonstration, 
Practical 
Written/ skill 
assessment

65 
Number COMPETENCY 
The student should be able to 
Predominant 
Domain 
K/S/A/C 
Level 
K/KH/S 
H/P 
Core 
(Y/N) 
Suggested Teaching 
Learning method 
Suggested Assessment 
method 
Number 
required 
to certify 
P 
AN52.3 Describe & identify the microanatomical features of Cardiooesophageal 
junction, Corpus luteum 
K,S SH N LGT, Demonstration, 
Practical 
Written/ skill 
assessment 
 
AN52.4 Describe the development of anterior abdominal wall K K H N LGT Written/ Viva 
voce 
 
AN52.5 Describe the development and congenital anomalies of Diaphragm K K H Y LGT Written/ Viva 
voce 
 
AN52.6 Describe the development and congenital anomalies of: Foregut, Midgut 
& Hindgut 
K K H Y LGT Written/ Viva 
voce 
 
AN52.7 Describe the development of Urinary system K K H Y LGT Written/ Viva 
voce 
 
AN52.8 Describe the development of male & female reproductive system K K H Y LGT Written/ Viva 
voce 
 
Topic 53: Osteology Number o f Competencies (4) Number o f competencies for certification: (NIL) 
AN53.1 Identify & hold the bone in the anatomical position, Describe the salient 
features, articulations & demonstrate the attachments of muscle groups 
K,S SH Y LGT, Demonstration, 
Practical 
Viva voce/ skill 
assessment 
 
AN53.2 Demonstrate the anatomical position of bony pelvis & show boundaries of 
pelvic inlet, pelvic cavity, pelvic outlet 
K,S SH Y LGT, DOAP Viva voce/ skill 
assessment 
 
AN53.3 Define true pelvis and false pelvis and demonstrate sex determination in 
male & female bony pelvis 
K,S SH Y LGT, DOAP Viva voce/ skill 
assessment 
 
AN53.4 Explain and demonstrate clinical importance of bones of abdominopelvic 
region (sacralization of lumbar vertebra, Lumbarization of 1st sacral 
vertebra, types of bony pelvis & Coccyx) 
K,S SH N LGT, DOAP Viva voce/ skill 
assessment 
 
Topic 54: Radiodiagnosis Number o f Competencies (4) Number o f competencies for certification: (NIL) 
AN54.1 Describe the principles of Plain and contrast radiography, Comp uted
Tomography, Magnetic Resonance Imaging, Positron Emission
Tomography scan and Digital subtraction angiography 
K K H Y LGT Viva voce/ skill 
assessment

66 
Number COMPETENCY 
The student should be able to 
Predominant 
Domain 
K/S/A/C 
Level 
K/KH/S 
H/P 
Core 
(Y/N) 
Suggested Teaching 
Learning method 
Suggested Assessment 
method 
Number 
required 
to certify 
P 
AN54.2 Describe & identify features of plain X ray abdomen K,S SH Y LGT, DOAP Viva voce/ skill 
assessment 
 
AN54.3 Describe & identify the special radiographs of abdominopelvic r egion
(contrast X ray Barium swallow, Barium meal, Barium enema ,
Cholecystography, Intravenous pyelography & Hysterosalpingography) 
K,S SH Y LGT, DOAP Viva voce/ skill 
assessment 
 
AN54.4 Describe role of ERCP, CT abdomen, MRI, Arteriography in radiodiagnosis 
of abdomen 
K K H N LGT Viva voce  
Topic 55: Surface marking Number of Competencies (2) Number of competencies for certification: (NIL) 
AN55.1 Demonstrate the surface marking of Regions and planes of abdomen,
Superficial inguinal ring, Deep 
inguinal ring, McBurney’s point, Renal Angle & Murphy’s point 
K,S SH Y Dissection, LGT, SGT, 
DOAP 
Viva voce/ skill 
assessment 
 
AN55.2 Demonstrate the surface projections of: Stomach, Liver, Fundus of gal l
bladder, Spleen, Duodenum, Pancreas, Ileocaecal junction, Kidneys & Root
of mesentery 
K,S SH Y Dissection, LGT, SGT, 
DOAP 
Viva voce/ skill 
assessment 
 
Topic 56: Meninges & CSF Number o f Competencies (2) Number o f competencies for certification: (NIL) 
AN56.1 Describe & identify various layers of meninges with its extent & 
modifications 
K,S SH Y LGT, Practical, 
Demonstration, 
Dissection 
Written/ Viva 
voce/ skill 
assessment 
 
AN56.2 Describe formation, circulation and absorption of CSF with its applied 
anatomy. 
K K H Y LGT Written/ Viva 
voce 
 
Topic 57 : Spinal Cord Number o f Competencies (5) Number o f competencies for certification: (NIL) 
AN57.1 Identify external features of spinal cord K,S SH Y Practical, Demonstration Written/ Viva 
voce/ skill 
assessment 
 
AN57.2 Describe extent of spinal cord in child & adult with its clinical implication K K H Y LGT, Demonstration Written/ Viva 
voce

67 
Number COMPETENCY 
The student should be able to 
Predominant 
Domain 
K/S/A/C 
Level 
K/KH/S 
H/P 
Core 
(Y/N) 
Suggested Teaching 
Learning method 
Suggested Assessment 
method 
Number 
required 
to certify 
P 
AN57.3 Draw & label transverse section of spinal cord at mid-cervical& mid-
thoracic level 
K K H Y LGT Written/ Viva 
voce 
 
AN57.4 Enumerate ascending & descending tracts at mid thoracic level of spinal 
cord 
K K H Y LGT Written/ Viva 
voce 
 
AN57.5 Describe the anatomical basis of clinical conditions affecting the grey and
white matter of spinal cord (Brown-Sequard Syndrome, Poliomyeli tis,
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis or  motor neuron disease, Syringom yelia,
Hereditary sensory neuropathy, Subacute Combined degeneration ,
Transversemyelitis, paraplegia) 
K K H Y LGT Written/ Viva 
voce 
 
Topic 58 : Medulla Oblongata Number o f Competencies (4) Number o f competencies for certification: (NIL) 
AN58.1 Identify external features of medulla oblongata K,S SH Y Practical, Demonstration Written/ Viva 
voce/ skill 
assessment 
 
AN58.2 Describe transverse section of medulla oblongata at the level o f 1) 
pyramidal decussation, 2) sensory decussation 3) Inferior Olivary Nucleus
K K H Y LGT Written/ Viva 
voce 
 
AN58.3 Describe cranial nerve nuclei in medulla oblongata with their functional 
group 
K K H Y LGT Written/ Viva 
voce 
 
AN58.4 Describe the anatomical basis of clinical conditions affecting the medulla 
oblongata (Medial and lateral medullary syndromes, Crossed Dipl egia) 
K K H Y LGT Written/ Viva 
voce 
 
Topic 59: Pons Number o f Competencies (4) Number o f competencies for certification: (NIL) 
AN59.1 Identify external features of pons K,S SH Y Practical, Demonstration Written/ Viva 
voce/ skill 
assessment 
 
AN59.2 Draw & label transverse section of pons at the upper and lowerlevel K K H Y LGT Written/ Viva 
voce

68 
Number COMPETENCY 
The student should be able to 
Predominant 
Domain 
K/S/A/C 
Level 
K/KH/S 
H/P 
Core 
(Y/N) 
Suggested Teaching 
Learning method 
Suggested Assessment 
method 
Number 
required 
to certify 
P 
AN59.3 Describe cranial nerve nuclei in pons with their functional group K K H Y LGT Written/ Viva 
voce 
 
AN59.4 Describe the anatomical basis of clinical conditions affecting the pons 
(Locked-in syndrome, Pontine haemorrhage, Foville syndrome, 
Raymond syndrome, Millard-Gubler syndrome) 
K K H Y LGT Written/ Viva 
voce 
 
Topic 60: Cerebellum Number o f Competencies (3) Number o f competencies for certification: (NIL) 
AN60.1 Describe & demonstrate external & internal features of cerebellum K,S SH Y Practical, Demonstration Written/ Viva 
voce/ skill 
assessment 
 
AN60.2 Describe connections of cerebellar cortex and intracerebellar nuclei K K H Y LGT Written/ Viva 
voce 
 
AN60.3 Describe anatomical basis of cerebellar dysfunction K K H N LGT Written  
Topic 61: Midbrain Number o f Competencies (3) Number o f competencies for certification: (NIL) 
AN61.1 Identify external & int ernal features of midbrain K,S SH Y Practical, Demonstration Written/ Viva 
voce/ skill 
assessment 
 
AN61.2 Describe internal features of midbrain at the level of superior& inferior 
colliculus 
K K H Y LGT Written/ Viva 
voce 
 
AN61.3 Describe the anatomical basis of clinical conditions affecting the midbrain 
(Weber syndrome, Benedikt syndrome, Parinaud syndrome) 
K K H Y LGT Written/ Viva 
voce 
 
Topic 62: Cranial nerve nuclei & Cerebral hemispheres Number o f Competencies (6) Number o f competencies for certification: (NIL) 
AN62.1 Describe the cranial nerve nuclei with its functional components K K H Y LGT Written/ Viva 
voce

69 
Number COMPETENCY 
The student should be able to 
Predominant 
Domain 
K/S/A/C 
Level 
K/KH/S 
H/P 
Core 
(Y/N) 
Suggested Teaching 
Learning method 
Suggested Assessment
method 
Number 
required 
to certify 
P 
AN62.2 Describe & demonstrate surfaces, sulci, gyri, poles, & function al areas of
cerebral hemisphere. Also describ e the effects of damage to var ious
functional areas of cerebral cortex 
K,S SH Y LGT, Practical, 
Demonstration 
Written/ Viva 
voce/ skill 
assessment 
 
AN62.3 Describe the white matter of cerebrum. Also describe the effect s of 
damage to corpus callosum and different parts of internal capsu le 
K K H Y LGT Written/ Viva 
voce 
 
AN62.4 Describe the parts & major connections of basal ganglia & limbic lobe. Also 
explain the anatomical 
basis of Parkinson’s disease, chorea, athetosis and ballismus 
K K H Y LGT Written/ Viva 
voce 
 
AN62.5 Describe boundaries, parts, gross relations, major nuclei and connections
of dorsal thalamus, hypothalamus , epithalamus, metathalamus and  
subthalamus 
K K H Y LGT Written/ Viva 
voce 
 
AN62.6 Describe & identify formation, branches & major areas of distribution of 
circle of Willis 
K/S SH Y LGT, Practical, 
Demonstration 
Written/ Viva 
voce/ skill 
assessment 
 
Topic 63: Ventricular System & Special sensory pathways Number o f Competencies (3) Number o f competencies for certification: (NIL)  
AN63.1 Describe & demonstrate parts, boundaries& features of 3rd, 4th& 
lateral ventricle 
K,S SH Y LGT, Practical, 
Demonstration 
Written/ Viva 
voce/ skill 
assessment 
 
AN63.2 Describe anatomical basis of congenital hydrocephalus K K H N LGT Written  
AN63.3 Describe the olfactory, v isual, auditory and gustatory pathways K K H Y LGT Written/ Viva 
voce 
 
Topic 64: Histology & Embryology Number of Competencies (3) Num ber of competencies for certification: (NIL)  
AN64.1 Describe & identify the microanatomical features of Spinal cord, 
Cerebellum & Cerebrum 
K,S SH Y LGT, Practical Written/ skill 
assessment 
 
AN64.2 Describe the development of neural tube, spinal cord, medulla oblongata, 
pons, midbrain, cerebral hemisphere & cerebellum 
K K H Y LGT Written/ Viva 
voce

70 
Number COMPETENCY 
The student should be able to 
Predominant 
Domain 
K/S/A/C 
Level 
K/KH/S 
H/P 
Core 
(Y/N) 
Suggested Teaching 
Learning method 
Suggested Assessmen 
method 
t Number 
required 
to certify 
P 
AN64.3 Describe various types of open neural tube defects with its embryological 
basis 
K K H N LGT Written/ Viva 
voce 
  
Topic 65: Epithelium histology Number o f Competencies (2) Number o f competencies for certification: (01)   
AN65.1 Identify epithelium under the microscope& describe the various types that 
correlate to its function 
K,S SH Y LGT, Practical Written/ skill 
assessment 
  
AN65.2 Describe the ultrastructure of epithelium K K H N LGT, Practical Written   
Topic 66: Connective tissue histology Number of Competencies (2 ) Number of competencies for certification: (NIL)   
AN66.1 Describe & identify various types of connective tissue with functional 
correlation 
K,S SH Y LGT, Practical Written/ skill 
assessment 
  
AN66.2 Describe the ultrastructure of connective tissue K K H N LGT, Practical Written   
Topic 67: Muscle histology Number o f Competencies (3) Number o f competencies for certification: (NIL)   
AN67.1 Describe & identify various types of muscle under the microscope K,S SH Y LGT, Practical Written/ skill 
assessment 
  
AN67.2 Classify muscleand describe  the structure-function correlation of the same K K H Y LGT Written   
AN67.3 Describe the ultras tructure of muscular tissue K K H N LGT Written   
Topic 68: Nervous tissue histology Number of Competencies (3) N umber of competencies for certification: (NIL)   
AN68.1 Describe & Identify multipolar &unipolar neuron, ganglia, peripheral nerve 
under the microscope 
K/S SH Y LGT, Practical Written/ skill 
assessment 
  
AN68.2 Describe the structure-function correlation of neuron K K H Y LGT Written   
AN68.3 Describe the ultrastructure of nervous tissue K K H N LGT Written   
Topic 69: Blood Vessels Number o f Competencies (3) Number o f competencies for certification: (NIL)   
AN69.1 Identify elastic & muscular blood vessels, capillaries under the microscope K,S SH Y LGT, Practical Skill assessment

71 
Number COMPETENCY 
The student should be able to 
Predominant 
Domain 
K/S/A/C 
Level 
K/KH/S 
H/P 
Core 
(Y/N) 
Suggested Teaching 
Learning method 
Suggested Assessmen 
method 
t Number 
required 
to certify 
P 
AN69.2 Describe the various types and structure-function correlation of blood 
vessel 
K K H Y LGT Written   
AN69.3 Describe the ultrastructure of blood vessels K K H Y LGT Written   
Topic 70: Glands & Lymphoid tissue Number o f Competencies (2) Number o f competencies for certification: (NIL)   
AN70.1 Identify exocrine gland under the microscope& distinguish between 
serous, mucous and mixed acini 
K,S SH Y LGT, Practical Written/ skill 
assessment 
  
AN70.2 Identify the lymphoid tissue under  the microscope & describe 
microanatomy of lymph node, spleen, thymus, tonsil andcorrelatethe 
structure with function 
K,S SH Y LGT, Practical Written/ skill 
assessment 
  
Topic: Bone & Cartilage - Number of Competencies (2)        
AN71.1 Identify bone under the microscope; classify various types and describe the
structure-function correlation of the same 
K,S SH Y LGT, Practical Written/ skill 
assessment 
  
AN71.2 Identify cartilage under the microscope & describe various type s and 
structure- function correlation of the same 
K,S SH Y LGT, Practical Written/ skill 
assessment 
  
Topic 72: Integumentary System Number o f Competencies (1) Number o f competencies for certification: (NIL)   
AN72.1 Identify the skin and its appendages under the microscope and correlate 
the structure with function 
K,S SH Y LGT, Practical Written/ skill 
assessment 
  
Topic: 73 Chromosomes Number of Competencies (3) Number of comp etencies for certification: (NIL)   
AN73.1 Describe the structure of  chromosomes with classification K K H Y LGT, Practical Written   
AN73.2 Describe technique of karyotyping with its applications K K H Y LGT, Practical Written   
AN73.3 Describe the Lyon's hypothesis K K H Y LGT, Practical Written   
Topic 74: Patterns of Inheritance Number o f Competencies (4) Number o f competencies for certification: (NIL)   
AN74.1 Describemendelian and non-mendelian inheritance. Explain various 
modes of inheritance with examples. 
K K H Y LGT, Practical Written   
AN74.2 Draw pedigree charts for the various types of inheritance & give examples 
of diseases of each mode of inheritance 
K K H Y LGT, Practical Written

72 
Number COMPETENCY 
The student should be able to 
Predominant 
Domain 
K/S/A/C 
Level 
K/KH/S 
H/P 
Core 
(Y/N) 
Suggested Teaching 
Learning method 
Suggested Assessmen 
method 
t Number 
required 
to certify 
P 
AN74.3 Describemultifactorial inheritance with examples K K H Y LGT, Practical Written   
AN74.4 Describe the genetic basis & clinical features of Achondroplasia, Cystic 
Fibrosis, Vitamin D resistant 
K K H N LGT, Practical Written   
Topic 75: Principles of Genetics, Chromosomal Aberrations & Clinical Genetics     Number of Competencies (5)      Number of competencies for certification: (NIL)   
AN75.1 Describe the structural and numerical chromosomal aberrations K K H Y LGT, Practical Written   
AN75.2 Explain the terms mosaics and chimeras with example K K H N LGT Written   
AN75.3 Describe the genetic basis & clinical features of: Prader Willi  syndrome,
Edward syndrome, Patau syndrome, Down syndrome, Turner Syndrome &
Klinefelter syndrome 
K K H N LGT Written   
AN75.4 Describe genetic basis of variation: polymorphism and mutation K K H Y LGT Written   
AN75.5 Describe in brief: genetic counseling, karyotyping, FISH, PCR and genetic 
sequencing 
K K H Y LGT Written   
Topic 76: Introduction to embryology              Number o f Competencies (2)      Number of compe tencies for certification: (NIL)   
AN76.1 Describe the stages of human life K K H Y LGT Written   
AN76.2 Explain the terms- phylogeny, ontogeny, trimester, viability K K H Y LGT written   
Topic 77: Gametogenesis and fertilization Number of Competencie s (6) Number of competencies for certification: (NIL)   
AN77.1 Describe the uterine changes occurring during the menstrualcycle K K H Y LGT Written   
AN77.2 Describe the synchrony between the ovarian and menstrual cycles K K H Y LGT Written   
AN77.3 Describe spermatogenesis and oogenesis along with diagrams K K H Y LGT Written   
AN77.4 Describe the stages and consequences of fertilisation K K H Y LGT Written   
AN77.5 Describe the anatomical principles underlying contraception K K H Y LGT Written

73 
Number COMPETENCY 
The student should be able to 
Predominant 
Domain 
K/S/A/C 
Level 
K/KH/S 
H/P 
Core 
(Y/N) 
Suggested Teaching 
Learning method 
Suggested Assessmen 
method 
t Number 
required 
to certify 
P 
AN77.6 Describe  teratogenic  influences:  fertility  and  sterility,  surrogate 
motherhood, social significance of “sex- ratio”. 
K K H N LGT Written   
Topic 78 : Second week of development Number o f Competencies (5) Number of competencies for certification: (NIL)   
AN78.1 Describe cleavage and formation of blastocyst K K H Y LGT Written   
AN78.2 Describe the development of trophoblast K K H Y LGT Written   
AN78.3 Describe the process of implantation & common abnormal sites of 
implantation 
K K H Y LGT Written   
AN78.4 Describe the formation of extra-embryonic mesoderm and coelom,
bilaminar disc and prochordal plate 
K K H Y LGT Written   
AN78.5 Describe abortion, decidual reaction, pregnancy test K K H Y LGT Written   
Topic 79: 3rd to 8th week of development Number o f Competencies (6) Number of competencies for certification: (NIL)   
AN79.1 Describe the formation & fate of the primitive streak K K H Y LGT Written   
AN79.2 Describe formation & fate of notochord K K H Y LGT Written   
AN79.3 Describe the process of neurulation K K H Y LGT Written   
AN79.4 Describe the development of somites and intra-embryonic coelom K K H Y LGT Written   
AN79.5 Explain embryological basis of congenital malformations, nucleu s 
pulposus, sacrococcygeal terat omas, neural tube defects 
K K H N LGT Written   
AN79.6 Describe the diagnosis of pregnancy in first trimester and role of 
teratogens, alpha-fetoprotein 
K K H N LGT Written   
Topic 80: Fetal membranes Number o f Competencies (7) Number o f competencies for certification: (NIL)   
AN80.1 Describe formation, functions & fate of chorion, amnion, yolk sac, 
allantois & decidua 
K K H Y LGT Written   
AN80.2 Describe formation & structure of umbilical cord K K H Y LGT Written

74 
Number COMPETENCY 
The student should be able to 
Predominant 
Domain 
K/S/A/C 
Level 
K/KH/S 
H/P 
Core 
(Y/N) 
Suggested Teaching 
Learning method 
Suggested Assessmen 
method 
t Number 
required 
to certify 
P 
AN80.3 Describe formation of placenta, its physiological functions, foetomaternal 
circulation & placental barrier 
K K H Y LGT Written   
AN80.4 Describe embryological basis of twinning in monozygotic & dizygotic twins K K H Y LGT Written   
AN80.5 Describe role of placental hormones in uterine growth & parturition K K H Y LGT Written   
AN80.6 Explain embryological basis of estimation of fetal age. K K H N LGT Written   
AN80.7 Describe various types of umbilical cord attachments K K H N LGT Written   
Topic 81: Prenatal Diagnosis Number o f Competencies (3) Number o f competencies for certification: (NIL)   
AN81.1 Describe various invasive & non-invasive methods of prenatal diagnosis K K H Y LGT Written   
AN81.2 Describe indications, process and disadvantages of amniocentesis K K H Y LGT Written   
AN81.3 Describe indications, process and disadvantages of chorion villus biopsy K K H Y LGT Written   
Topic 82: Ethics in Anatomy Number o f Competencies (1) Number of competen cies for certification: (NIL)   
AN 82.1 Demonstrate respect, and follow the correct procedure when 
handling cadavers and other biologic tissue 
A SH Y SGT NI L

75 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PHYSIOLOGY (CODE: PY)

76 
Number COMPETENCY 
The student should be able to: 
Predominant 
Domain 
K/S/A/C 
Level K/KH/ 
SH/P 
Core (Y/N) Suggested Teaching 
Learning method 
Suggested 
Assessment 
method 
Number 
required to 
certify P 
PHYSIOLOGY (Topics = 12, Competencies = 136) 
 Topic 1: General Physiology Number of competencies: (7) Number of competencies that require certification : (NIL) 
PY1.1 Describe the structure and functions of a cell, intercell ular 
communication and their applications in Clinical care and research 
K KH Y LGT Written/Viva voce  
PY1.2 Discuss the principles of homeostasis and feedback mechan ism K KH Y LGT Written/Viva voce  
PY1.3 Describe apoptosis (programmed cell death) , explain its mechanism of 
action and physiological significance. 
K KH Y LGT SGT Written/Viva voce  
PY1.4 Describe and discuss various transport mechanisms across cell 
membranes 
K KH Y LGT Student Seminar Written/Viva 
voce/Assignments 
 
PY1.5 Describe the fluid compartments of the body, its ionic co mposition & 
measurement methods 
K KH Y LGT Written/Viva voce  
PY1.6 Describe the concept of pH  & Buffer systems in the body K  KH Y LGT SGT Written/Viva voce  
PY1.7 Describe the molecular basis of resting membrane potential (RMP)and 
generation of action potential in a nerve fibre 
K KH Y LGT SGT/Tutorial Written/Viva voce  
 Topic 2: Haematology Number of competencies: (13) Number of com petencies that require certification : (01) 
PY2.1 Describe the composition and functions of blood and its c omponents K KH Y LGT SGT Written/Viva voce  
PY2.2 Discuss the origin, forms,  variations and functions of plasma proteins and
its clinical implications 
K KH Y LGT SGT Written/Viva voce  
PY2.3 Describe the physiological structure, synthesis , functions and 
breakdown of Hemoglobin. Discuss its variants and clinical significance. 
K KH Y LGT SGT Written/Viva voce  
PY2.4 Describe Erythropoiesis & discu ss its regulation in physiologic al and 
pathological situations 
K KH Y LGT SGT Written/Viva voce  
PY2.5 Describe anaemias, polycythemia & jaundice and discuss it s physiological 
principles of management 
K KH Y LGT SGT, Student Seminar, 
ECE 
Written/Viva voce  
PY2.6 Describe the formation of WBC (Leucopoiesis), structure a nd function of 
various WBC types and their regulatory mechanisms 
K KH Y LGT SGT Written/Viva voce

77 
Number COMPETENCY 
The student should be able to: 
Predominant 
Domain 
K/S/A/C 
Level K/KH/ 
SH/P 
Core (Y/N) Suggested Teaching 
Learning method 
Suggested 
Assessment 
method 
Number 
required to 
certify P 
PY2.7 Discuss 'Immunity' in terms  of its types, development, re gulation and 
physiological significance 
K KH Y LGT SGT/Tutorials Written/Viva voce  
P Y 2 . 8  D e s c r i b e   t h e   f o r m a t i o n   o f   p l a t e l e t s   ( t h r o m b o p o i e s i s ),  structure,
functions and variations. 
K KH Y LGT SGT Written/Viva voce  
PY2.9 Describe hemostasis, coagulation pathways, mechanism of action of 
anticoagulants and briefly discuss pathophysiological aspects of bleeding 
& clotting disorders (e.g. hemophilia, purpura) 
K KH Y LGT SGT, ECE- Visit to blood 
bank 
Flipped Classroom 
Written/Viva voce  
PY2.10 Discuss types of blood groups, cl inical importance of blood gro uping, 
blood banking and transfusion 
K KH Y LGT SGT,ECE- Visit to blood 
bank 
Written/Viva voce  
PY2.11 Estimate Hb, RBC, TLC, DLC, Blood groups, BT/CT, RBC ind ices S SH Y DOAPs Practical/OSPE/Viva 
voce 
01 EACH 
PY2.12 Describe the test to measure Erythrocyte Sedimentation Rate (ES R), 
Osmotic fragility, Hematocrit, and interpret its findings 
K KH Y Demonstration Written /Viva 
voce/OSPE 
(Question station) 
 
PY2.13 Describe steps for reticulocyte and platelet count K KH Y Demonstration Written /Viva voce  
Topic 3: Nerve and Muscle Physiology Number of competencies: (1 2) Number of competencies that require certification : (01) 
PY3.1 Describe the structure and functions of a neuron and neur oglia; Discuss
nerve growth factors 
K KH Y LGT Written/Viva voce  
PY3.2 Describe the types, functions, properties of nerve fibers including 
strength duration curve, chronaxie and rheobase 
K KH Y LGT Written/Viva voce  
PY3.3 Classify nerve injury and discuss the mechanism of degeneration  a n d
regeneration in peripheral nerves 
K KH Y LGT Written/Viva voce  
PY3.4 Describe the microscopic structu re of neuro-muscular junction (NMJ) 
and mechanism of neuromuscular transmission 
K KH Y LGT SGT Written/Viva voce  
PY3.5 Discuss the applied aspects of n euromuscular junction : myasthenia 
gravis, Lambert Eaton syndrome and neuromuscular blocking agents. 
K KH Y LGT SGT, ECE (classroom / 
hospital setting) 
Written/Viva voce  
PY3.6 Describe the different types of muscle fibres, their structure and
physiological basis of action potential 
K KH Y LGT Written/Viva voce

78 
Number COMPETENCY 
The student should be able to: 
Predominant 
Domain 
K/S/A/C 
Level K/KH/ 
SH/P 
Core (Y/N) Suggested Teaching 
Learning method 
Suggested 
Assessment 
method 
Number 
required to 
certify P 
PY3.7 Describe properties, action potential and molecular basis  o f  m u s c l e
contraction in skeletal muscle 
K KH Y LGT SGT 
Flipped Classroom 
Written/Viva voce  
PY3.8 Describe properties, action potential and molecular basis  o f  m u s c l e
contraction in smooth muscle 
K KH Y LGT SGT Written/Viva voce  
PY3.9 Describe the mode of muscle contraction (isometric and isotonic ), 
energy source, muscle metabolism and gradation of muscular activity 
K KH Y LGT Written/Viva voce  
PY3.10 Enumerate and briefly discuss myopathies K KH Y LGT SGT Written/Viva voce  
PY3.11 Perform Ergography and calculate the work done by a skel etal muscle S SH Y DOAPs Practical/OSPE/Viva 
voce 
01 EACH 
PY3.12 Observe with Computer assisted learning (i) Amphibian nerve -muscle 
experiments (ii) Amphibian cardiac experiments 
S SH Y DOAPs Practical/OSPE/Viva 
voce 
 
Topic 4: Gastro-intestinal Physiology Number of competencies: ( 12) Number of competencies that require certification : (01) 
PY4.1 Describe the functional anatomy of digestive system K KH Y LGT SGT Written/Viva voce  
PY4.2 Enumerate various Gastrointestin al hormones (GI) hormones, disc uss 
their functions and regulation 
K KH Y LGT SGT Written/Viva voce  
PY4.3 Describe the composition, mechan ism of secretion, functions, an d 
regulation of saliva 
K KH Y LGT SGT Written/Viva voce  
PY4.4 Describe the composition, mechan ism of secretion, functions, an d 
regulation of gastric juice. Discuss various gastric function tests 
K KH Y LGT Written/Viva voce  
PY4.5 Describe the composition, mechanism of secretion, functions, an d 
regulation of pancreatic juice including various pancreatic exo crine 
function tests 
K KH Y LGT Written/Viva voce  
PY4.6 Describe the composition, mechanism of secretion, functions, an d
regulation of intestinal juices 
K KH Y LGT Written/Viva voce  
PY4.7 Describe the physiology of  digestion and absorption of nutrients K KH Y LGT SGT Written/Viva voce  
PY4.8 Describe GIT movements, its regulation and physiological signif icance 
including defecation reflex and the role of dietary fibres 
K KH Y LGT SGT 
Flipped Classroom 
Written/Viva voce

79 
Number COMPETENCY 
The student should be able to: 
Predominant 
Domain 
K/S/A/C 
Level K/KH/ 
SH/P 
Core (Y/N) Suggested Teaching 
Learning method 
Suggested 
Assessment 
method 
Number 
required to 
certify P 
PY4.9 Describe the structure , functions and secretion of liver and gallbladder 
with elaboration of various liver function tests 
K KH Y LGT SGT Written/Viva voce  
PY4.10 Describe the Gut-Brain Axis and its physiological signif icance K KH Y LGT SGT, Written/Viva voce  
PY4.11 Discuss (in brief) the applied physiology of GIT viz. Peptic ul cer, 
gastroesophageal reflux disease,  vomiting, diarrhoea, constipat ion, 
Adynamic ileus, Hirschsprung's disease 
K KH Y LGT SGT, ECE, SDL Written/Viva voce  
PY4.12 Obtain  relevant history and  conduct correct General and Clinical
examination of the abdomen in a normal volunteer or simulated 
environment 
S,A,C SH Y DOAP (Simulation or real life 
setting) 
Skill assessment/ 
Viva voce/OSCE 
1 
Topic 5: Cardiovascular Physiology Number of competencies: (16)  Number of competencies that require certification : (03) 
PY5.1 Describe the functional anatomy of heart including chambers and  
coronary circulation 
K KH Y LGT Written/Viva voce  
PY5.2 Describe the properties of cardiac muscle including its morphol ogy, 
electrical, mechanical and metabolic functions 
K KH Y LGT SGT Written/Viva voce  
PY5.3 Describe generation and conduction of cardiac impulse along with the 
conduction pathway ( including pacemaker potential). 
K KH Y LGT SGT Written/Viva voce  
PY5.4 Discuss the physiological events occurring during the car diac cycle,
concurrent pressure volume changes, generation of heart sounds and 
murmur 
K KH Y LGT SGT 
Flipped Classroom 
Written/Viva voce  
PY5.5 Describe the physiology of electrocardiogram (E.C.G), the  cardiac axis 
and its applications 
K KH Y LGT SGT, ECE Written/Viva 
voce/OSCE 
(Question station) 
 
PY5.6 Discuss physiological variations in ECG waveforms, abnormal waveforms 
and intervals , arrhythmias, heart blocks and myocardial Infarction 
K KH Y LGT SGT/Student 
seminars/ECE 
Written/Viva voce  
PY5.7 Discuss haemodynamics of circulatory system K KH Y LGT SG T/Tutorials Written/Viva voce  
PY5.8 Describe and discuss local and sy stemic cardiovascular regulato ry 
mechanisms 
K KH Y LGT SGT Written/Viva voce  
PY5.9 Describe heart rate, factors affecting heart rate, and it s regulation K KH Y LGT SGT Written/Viva voce

80 
Number COMPETENCY 
The student should be able to: 
Predominant 
Domain 
K/S/A/C 
Level K/KH/ 
SH/P 
Core (Y/N) Suggested Teaching 
Learning method 
Suggested 
Assessment 
method 
Number 
required to 
certify P 
PY5.10 Describe  cardiac output, factors affecting cardiac output and its
regulation. 
K KH Y LGT SGT Written/Viva voce  
PY5.11 Describe blood pressure, factor s affecting blood pressure and i ts 
regulation 
K KH Y LGT SGT/Student seminars Written/Viva voce  
PY5.12 Describe & discuss regional circu lation including microcirculat ion, 
lymphatic circulation, cerebral, capillary, skin, foetal, pulmo nary and 
splanchnic circulation 
K KH Y LGT SGT Written/Viva voce  
PY5.13 Describe the patho-physiology of shock, syncope heart failure w ith 
physiological basis of its management 
K KH Y LGT SGT / Student seminars Written/Viva voce  
PY5.14 Record blood pressure & pulse at rest and in different grades of exercise 
and postures in a volunteer or simulated environment 
S SH Y DOAPs (Simulation or real 
life setting) 
Practical/OSPE/ 
Viva voce 
3 
PY5.15 R e c o r d  a n d  i n t e r p r e t  n o r m a l  E C G  i n  a  v o l u n t e e r  o r  s i m u l a t e d  
environment 
S SH Y DOAPs (Simulation or real 
life setting) 
Practical/OSPE/ 
Viva voce 
1 
PY5.16 Obtain relevant history an d conduct General and Clinical examination of
the cardiovascular  system in a  normal volunteer  or simulated 
environment 
S,A,C SH Y DOAPs Skill assessment/ 
Viva voce/OSCE 
1 
Topic 6: Respiratory Physiology Number of competencies: (13) Nu mber of competencies that require certification : (02) 
PY6.1 Describe the functional anatomy of respiratory tract and non-respiratory 
functions of lungs 
K KH Y LGT SGT Written/Viva voce  
PY6.2 Describe the mechanics of normal respiration, pressure ch anges during 
ventilation, lung volume and capacities (Static and Dynamic) 
K KH Y LGT SGT Written/Viva voce  
PY6.3 Describe the alveolar surface tension, compliance, airway resis tance, 
ventilation, V/P ratio, diffusion capacity of lungs 
K KH Y LGT SGT Written/Viva voce  
PY6.4 Discuss the transport of respiratory gases viz Oxygen and Carbon dioxide 
across lungs and whole body 
K KH Y LGT Written/Viva voce  
PY6.5 Describe the chemoreceptors (peripheral and central) and neural centres 
of respiration including chemical and neural regulation of respiration 
K KH Y LGT Written/Viva voce

81 
Number COMPETENCY 
The student should be able to: 
Predominant 
Domain 
K/S/A/C 
Level K/KH/ 
SH/P 
Core (Y/N) Suggested Teaching 
Learning method 
Suggested 
Assessment 
method 
Number 
required to 
certify P 
PY6.6 Describe and discuss the pathophysiology of dyspnoea, hypoxia, 
cyanosis, asphyxia, drowning, periodic breathing and oxygen therapy 
K KH Y LGT SGT Written/Viva voce  
PY6.7 Discuss various lung functi on tests and their clinical si gnificance in
obstructive and restrictive lung diseases 
K KH Y LGT SGT, Tutorials 
Flipped Classroom 
Written/Viva voce  
PY6.8 Discuss the physiology of high altitude and acclimatizati on K KH Y LGT Written/Viva voce  
PY6.9 Discuss the physiology of deep sea diving and decompression sickness K KH Y LGT Written/Viva voce  
PY6.10 Perform Spirometry and interpret the findings (Digital /  Manual) S P Y DOAPs Skill assessment/ 
Viva voce/OSCE 
1 
PY6.11 Describe principles and methods of artificial respiratio n S SH Y DOAPs Practical/OSPE/ 
Viva voce 
 
PY6.12 Obtain relevant history and conduct correct General and Clinica l 
e x a m i n a t i o n  o f  t h e  r e s p i r a t o r y  s y s t e m  i n  a  n o r m a l  v o l u n t e e r  o r  
simulated environment 
S,A,C SH Y DOAPs Practical/OSPE/ 
Viva voce 
1 
PY6.13 Demonstrate the correct technique to perform measurement of peak 
expiratory flow rate in a normal volunteer or simulated environment 
S SH Y DOAPs Practical/OSPE/ 
Viva voce 
 
Topic 7: Renal Physiology Number of competencies: (9) Number of  competencies that require certification : (NIL) 
PY7.1 Describe the functional anatomy of kidney and non-excreto ry functions
of kidney 
K KH Y LGT SGT Written/Viva voce  
PY7.2 Describe the structure and functions of juxta glomerular appara tus and
role of renin-angiotensin system 
K KH Y LGT Written/Viva voce  
PY7.3 Describe the mechanism of urine formation involving processes of 
filtration (Glomerular filtration), tubular reabsorption & secretion. 
K KH Y LGT SGT, Student Seminar Written/Viva voce  
PY7.4 Describe the mechanism of urine concentration and dilution (Cou nter
current Multiplier & Exchanger ) 
K KH Y LGT SGT 
Flipped Classroom 
Written/Viva voce  
PY7.5 Describe the renal regulation of fluid and electrolytes &  a c i d - b a s e
balance 
K KH Y LGT SGT Written/Viva voce  
PY7.6 Describe the innervations of urinary bladder, physiology of mic turition
and its abnormalities 
K KH Y LGT SGT Written/Viva voce

82 
Number COMPETENCY 
The student should be able to: 
Predominant 
Domain 
K/S/A/C 
Level K/KH/ 
SH/P 
Core (Y/N) Suggested Teaching 
Learning method 
Suggested 
Assessment 
method 
Number 
required to 
certify P 
PY7.7 Describe cystometry and discuss the normal cystometrogram  K KH Y LGT SGT Written/Viva voce  
PY7.8 Discuss various Renal Function Tests with its physiologic al significance 
and clinical implication of Renal clearance 
K KH Y LGT SGT, ECE (classroom / 
hospital setting) 
Written/Viva voce  
PY7.9 Discuss the role of artificial kidneys, dialysis and indications of renal 
transplant 
K KH Y LGT Viva voce  
Topic 8: Endocrine Physiology Number of competencies: (7) Numbe r of competencies that require certification : (NIL) 
PY8.1 Describe the functional anatomy of endocrine glands, mech anism of 
hormonal action (steroid and pept ide) and hypothalamus pituitar y axis
{HPA} 
K KH Y LGT 
Flipped Classroom 
Written/Viva voce  
PY8.2 Describe the synthesis, secretion, transport, physiological actions, 
regulation and effect of altered (hypo and hyper) secretion of pituitary
gland 
K KH Y LGT SGT Written/Viva voce  
PY8.3 Describe the synthesis, secretion, transport, physiological act ions, 
regulation and effect of altered (hypo and hyper) secretion of thyroid 
gland including thyroid function tests 
K KH Y LGT SGT, ECE Written/Viva voce  
PY8.4 Describe  the synthesis, secretion, transport, physiological actions,
regulation and effect of altered (hypo and hyper) secretion of adrenal 
gland and its function tests 
K KH Y LGT SGT Written/Viva voce  
PY8.5 Describe the synthesis, secretion, transport, physiological act ions, 
regulation and effect of altered (hypo and hyper) secretion of 
parathyroid gland with emphasis of physiology of bone and calci um
metabolism 
K KH Y LGT SGT/Tutorials Written/Viva voce  
PY8.6 Describe the synthesis, secretion, transport, physiological act ions, 
regulation and effect of altered (hypo and hyper) secretion of pancreatic 
gland including pancreatic function tests 
K KH Y LGT SGT Written/Viva voce  
PY8.7 Describe the physiology of Thymus & Pineal Gland K KH Y L GT Written/Viva voce  
Topic 9: Reproductive Physiology Number of competencies: (10) N umber of competencies that require certification : (NIL)

83 
Number COMPETENCY 
The student should be able to: 
Predominant 
Domain 
K/S/A/C 
Level K/KH/ 
SH/P 
Core (Y/N) Suggested Teaching 
Learning method 
Suggested 
Assessment 
method 
Number 
required to 
certify P 
PY9.1 Explain sex determination, sex differentiation and their abnorm alities 
and discuss the effects of removal of gonads on physiological functions 
K KH Y LGT SGT Written/Viva voce  
PY9.2 Describe and discuss pubert y: onset, progression, stages;  e a r l y  a n d
delayed puberty. 
K KH Y LGT SGT Written/Viva voce  
PY9.3 Describe the functional anatomy of male reproductive syst em, functions
of testis, spermatogenesis and discuss the functions and regulations of 
testosterone hormone 
K KH Y LGT SGT OSPE/Viva voce  
PY9.4 Describe the functional anatomy of female reproductive system: 
functions of ovary and its hormones ( estrogen and progesterone ) ; 
hormonal regulation by hypothalamic pituitary gonadal (HPG axis) 
K KH Y LGT SGT , Student Seminar Written/Viva voce  
PY9.5 Discuss the menstrual cycle, uterine and ovarian changes,  h o r m o n a l  
regulation and its implications in reproductive physiology 
K KH Y LGT SGT, ECE Written/Viva voce  
PY9.6 Enumerate male and female contraceptive methods, rationale of i ts 
prescription, side effects and its advantages & disadvantages 
K KH Y LGT SGT, ECE,SDL Written/Viva voce  
PY9.7 Discuss the physiology of pregnancy, parturition & lactat ion. K KH Y LGT SGT, 
Flipped Classroom 
Written/Viva voce  
PY9.8 Discuss the physiological basis of various pregnancy test s K KH Y LGT SGT Written/Viva voce  
PY9.9 Discuss the hormonal changes and their effects during per imenopause
and menopause 
K KH Y LGT SGT Written/Viva voce  
PY9.10 Discuss the common causes of infertility in a couple and role of IVF in 
managing a case of infertility 
K KH Y LGT SGT, visit to IVF lab Written/Viva voce  
Topic 10: Central Nervous System Physiology Number of competenc ies: ( 20) Number of competencies that require certification : (02) 
PY10.1 Describe and discuss the functional organization of cent ral nervous
system (brain and spinal cord) 
K KH Y LGT SGT Written/Viva voce  
PY10.2 Describe the functional anatomy of peripheral nervous sy stem (including
autonomic nervous system) 
K KH Y LGT SGT Written/Viva voce  
PY10.3 Classify the neurotransmitters and discuss the chemical transmission in
the nervous system. 
K KH Y LGT SGT Written/Viva voce

84 
Number COMPETENCY 
The student should be able to: 
Predominant 
Domain 
K/S/A/C 
Level K/KH/ 
SH/P 
Core (Y/N) Suggested Teaching 
Learning method 
Suggested 
Assessment 
method 
Number 
required to 
certify P 
PY10.4 Discuss the classification , functions and properties of synapse K KH Y LGT SGT ,Student Seminar Written/Viva voce  
PY10.5 Discuss the classification, functions and properties of reflex K KH Y LGT SGT, Student Seminar Written/Viva voce  
PY10.6 Discuss the classification , functions and properties of receptors K KH Y LGT SGT , Student Seminar Written/Viva voce  
PY10.7 Discuss somatic sensations,  ascending tracts,  (sensory tracts) and
applied aspects of sensory system 
K KH Y LGT SGT Written/Viva voce  
PY10.8 Discuss Physiology of pain including pain pathways and its modulation 
with special emphasis on gate control theory of pain 
K KH Y LGT SGT, visit to pain clinic Written/Viva voce  
PY10.9 Describe the course of descending tracts (pyramidal and extra 
pyramidal), its clinical implica tions including difference in U pper motor 
neuron (UMN)and lower motor neuron (LMN) lesions 
K KH Y LGT SGT Written/Viva voce  
PY10.10 Discuss types and clinical featu res of spinal cord lesions (com plete, 
incomplete transection and hemisection - Brown Sequard syndrome ) 
K KH Y LGT SGT, Tutorials, ECE Written/Viva voce  
PY10.11 Describe functional anatomy of cerebellum, its connecti ons, functions
and clinical abnormalities . 
K KH Y LGT SGT Written/Viva voce  
PY10.12 Discuss functional anatomy of basal ganglia , its conne ctions, functions
and Clinical abnormalities . 
K KH Y LGT SGT Written/Viva voce  
PY10.13 Discuss the mechanism of  maintenance of tone, posture and control of
body movements 
K KH Y LGT SGT 
Flipped Classroom 
Written/Viva voce  
PY10.14 Discuss functional anatomy of thalamus , its connection s, functions and
clinical abnormalities . 
K KH Y LGT SGT Written/Viva voce  
PY10.15 Discuss functional anatomy of hypothalamus and limbic system , its 
connections, functions and clinical abnormalities . 
K KH Y LGT SGT Written/Viva voce  
PY10.16 Discuss functional anatomy of cerebral cortex, its conn ections, functions
and Clinical abnormalities 
K KH Y LGT SGT Written/Viva voce  
PY10.17 Discuss the structure and functions of reticular activating system, sleep 
physiology and EEG waveforms during sleep wake cycle 
K KH Y LGT SGT, visit to sleep lab Written/Viva voce

85 
Number COMPETENCY 
The student should be able to: 
Predominant 
Domain 
K/S/A/C 
Level K/KH/ 
SH/P 
Core (Y/N) Suggested Teaching 
Learning method 
Suggested 
Assessment 
method 
Number 
required to 
certify P 
PY10.18 Discuss the physiologica l basis of memory, learning and speech and 
clinical alterations in speech 
K KH Y LGT SGT Written/Viva voce  
PY10.19 Obtain relevant history and conduct correct General and Clinical 
examination of the nervous system: Higher functions, sensory system, 
motor system, reflexes in a normal volunteer or simulated environment
S SH Y DOAPs Skill assessment/ 
Viva voce/OSCE 
4 (each) 
PY10.20 Obtain relevant history and conduct correct General and  Clinical 
examination of the cranial nerves in a normal volunteer or simulated 
environment 
S P Y DOAPs OSCE/Viva voce 1 (each) 
Topic 11: Special Senses Number o f competencies: ( 7) Number of  competencies that require certification : (NIL) 
PY11.1 Describe and discuss physiology of smell and its applied  aspects K KH Y LGT SGT Written/Viva voce  
PY11.2 Describe and discuss physiology of taste sensation and a pplied aspects K KH Y LGT SGT Written/Viva voce  
PY11.3 Describe and discuss functional anatomy of ear and audit ory pathways,
vestibular apparatus and equilibrium 
K KH Y LGT SGT Written/Viva voce  
PY11.4 Discuss physiology of hearing, pathophysiology of deafne ss and hearing
tests 
K KH Y LGT SGT Written/Viva voce  
PY11.5 Discuss functional anatomy of ey e, visual pathway, light and pu pillary 
reflex and clinical implication of lesions in visual pathway 
K KH Y LGT SGT Written/Viva voce  
P Y 1 1 . 6  D i s c u s s  p h y s i o l o g y  o f   i m a g e   f o r m a t i o n ,   r e f r a c t i v e   e rrors and 
physiological principles of its management 
K S P Y LGT SGT ECE Written/Viva voce  
PY11.7 Discuss physiology of vision including colour vision and  colour blindness K KH Y LGT SGT 
Flipped Classroom 
Written/Viva voce  
Topic 12: Integrated Physiology Number of competencies: (10) Nu mber of competencies that require certification : (NIL) 
PY12.1 Describe physiological mechanism of temperature regulati on K KH Y LGT SGT Written/Viva voce  
PY12.2 Discuss adaptation to altered temperature (heat and cold) and 
mechanism of fever, cold injuries and heat stroke 
K KH Y LGT SGT Written/Viva voce  
PY12.3 Discuss cardio-respiratory and metabolic adjustments during exe rcise 
(isometric and isotonic), effects of physical training under di fferent 
environmental conditions (heat and cold) 
K KH Y LGT SGT Written/Viva voce

86 
Number COMPETENCY 
The student should be able to: 
Predominant 
Domain 
K/S/A/C 
Level K/KH/ 
SH/P 
Core (Y/N) Suggested Teaching 
Learning method 
Suggested 
Assessment 
method 
Number 
required to 
certify P 
PY12.4 Discuss physiological consequences of sedentary lifestyle; metabolic and 
endocrinal consequences of obesity & metabolic syndrome. 
K KH Y LGT SGT Written/Viva voce  
PY12.5 Describe physiology of Infancy, Interpret growth charts and 
anthropometric assessment of infants 
K KH Y LGT SGT, ECE Written/Viva voce  
PY12.6 Describe and discuss physiology of aging, role of free r adicals and
antioxidants 
K KH Y LGT SGT Written/Viva voce  
PY12.7 Discuss the concept, criteria for diagnosis of Brain dea th and its
implications 
K KH Y Small group teaching Practical/OSPE/ 
Viva voce 
 
PY12.8 Discuss the physiology of yoga and meditation K KH Y Sma ll group teaching Practical/OSPE/ 
Viva voce 
 
PY12.9 Obtain history and perform general examination in the vo lunteer /
simulated environment 
S SH Y DOAPs Skill assessment/ 
Viva voce/OSCE 
 
PY12.10 Demonstrate Basic Life Support in a simulated environme nt S SH Y DOAPs, Simulation lab 
(Simulation or real life 
setting) 
Skill assessment/ 
Viva voce/OSCE

87 
 
 
 
 
 
 
BIOCHEMISTRY (CODE: BC) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
.

88 
Number COMPETENCY 
The student should be able to 
Predominant 
Domain 
K/S/A/C 
Level 
K/KH/S 
H/P 
Core 
(Y/N) 
Suggested Teaching 
Learning method 
Suggested 
Assessment 
method 
Num
requ 
to ce
ber 
ired 
rtify 
P 
BIOCHEMISTRY (Topics = 14, Competencies = 84) 
Topic 1: Basic Biochemistry Number of competencies:(01) Number of competencies that require certification:(NIL) 
BC1.1 Describe the molecular and functional organization of a cell and its sub-
cellular components and composition and functions of Biologica l
membranes. 
 
K 
 
KH 
 
Y 
 
LGT, SGT / SDL 
Written 
assessment/ Viva 
voce 
 
Topic 2: Enzyme Number of competencies:(05) Number of competenc ies that require certification:(NIL) 
BC2.1 Explain fundamental concepts of enzyme, isoenzyme and coenzyme.  
Enumerate the main classes of IUBMB nomenclature. 
K K H Y LGT, SGT Written 
assessment / 
Viva voce 
 
BC2.2 Describe and explain the basic principles of enzyme activity K K H Y LGT, SGT Written assessment / 
Viva voce 
 
BC2.3 Describe and discuss enzyme Inhibition and role of enzymes or drugs as 
Inhibitors, and enzymes as therapeutic agents. 
K K H Y LGT, Casediscussion SGT Written assessment / 
Viva voce 
 
BC2.4 Describe and discuss the clinical utility of various serum enzy mes in 
laboratory and their use as markers of various pathological conditions. 
K K H Y LGT, SGT, Flipped class 
room 
Written assessment / 
Viva voce 
 
BC2.5 Interpret laboratory results of enzymes in various disorders. K K H Y SGT, DOAPs, Case Studies Written assessment/ 
Viva voce/ Case 
studies, OSPE 
 
Topic 3: Chemistry and Metabolism of Carbohydrates Number of co mpetencies:(06) Number of competencies that require certificati on:(NIL)

89 
Number COMPETENCY 
The student should be able to 
Predominant 
Domain 
K/S/A/C 
Level 
K/KH/S 
H/P 
Core 
(Y/N) 
Suggested Teaching 
Learning method 
Suggested 
Assessment 
method 
Number 
required 
to certify 
P 
BC3.1 Discuss and differentiate monos accharides, di-saccharides an d
polysaccharides with examples, th eir importance as energy fuel ,
structural element, and storage molecule in human body. 
 
K 
 
KH 
 
Y 
 
LGT, SGT 
 
Written/Viva voce 
 
BC3.2 Describe the digestion, absorption and transport of carbohydrates from 
food along with its disorders. K KH Y LGT, SGT, SDL Written/Viva-voce 
 
BC3.3 Define and briefly describe the pathways of carbohydrate metabolism 
and their regulation (glycolysis, gluconeogenesis, TCA, and 
significance of glycogen metabolism and HMP shunt), with associated 
disorders. 
 
K 
 
KH 
 
Y 
 
LGT, SGT, Flipped class 
room 
 
Written/Viva voce 
 
BC3.4 Describe and discuss the regulation, functions and integration of minor
Carbohydrate Metabolism pathway briefly along with associated 
diseases /disorders. 
 
K 
 
KH 
 
Y 
 
LGT, SGT 
 
Written/Viva-voce 
 
BC3.5 Discuss the mechanism and signifi cance of blood glucose regulat ion
(Glucose homeostasis) in health and disease. Describe the types ,
Biochemical changes, complicatio ns and laboratory investigation s
related to diabetes & other carbohydrate metal disorders. 
 
K 
 
KH 
 
Y 
 
LGT, SGT, Flipped class 
room 
 
Written/Viva voce 
 
BC3.6 Interpret the results of analytes associated with metabolism of
carbohydrates and other laboratory investigations related to disorders 
of carbohydrate metabolism. 
 
K 
 
KH 
 
Y LGT, SGT Case Studies / 
SDL, Flipped class room 
Written/ Viva voce/ 
Case Studies /OSPE 
 
Topic 4 : Chemistry and Metabolism of Lipids Number of competen cies: (08) Number of competencies that require certification:(N IL) 
BC4.1 Describe and discuss main classes of lipids and their functions. K KH Y LGT, SGT /SDL Written/Viva voce  
BC4.2 Describe the digestion and absorption of dietary lipids and its  
(associated disorders. K KH Y LGT, SGT /SDL Written /Viva voce  
BC4.3 Describe and discuss the fatty acid oxidation, metabolism of ke tone 
bodies along with their clinical significance. K KH Y LGT, SGT Written /Viva voce

90 
Number COMPETENCY 
The student should be able to 
Predominant 
Domain 
K/S/A/C 
Level 
K/KH/S 
H/P 
Core 
(Y/N) 
Suggested Teaching 
Learning method 
Suggested 
Assessment 
method 
Number 
required 
to certify 
P 
BC4.4 Describe metabolism of Triglycerides and cholesterol metabolism along 
with its regulation and clinical significance. 
 
K 
 
KH 
 
Y 
 
LGT, SGT 
 
Written /Viva voce 
 
BC4.5 Describe the metabolism of lipoproteins with brief overview of 
lipoprotein structure, their interrelations & relations with
atherosclerosis. 
 
K 
 
KH 
 
Y 
 
LGT, SGT 
 
Written /Viva voce 
 
BC4.6 Discuss Biological role and therapeutic applications of Eicosanoids and 
their Inhibitors. K KH Y LGT, SGT, Flipped class 
room Written /Viva voce 
 
BC4.7 Describe Fatty liver, cholelithiasis and obesity. 
K KH Y LGT, SGT, Case 
Studies/Scenarios/SDL Written /Viva voce 
 
BC4.8 Interpret laboratory results of analytes associated with metabolism of 
lipids K KH Y LGT, SGT, case studies, 
Flipped class room 
Written/Viva voce/ 
case studies/OSPE 
 
Topic 5: Chemistry & Metabolism of Proteins and Immunology Numb er of competencies:(09) Number of competencies that require cer tification:(NIL) 
BC5.1 Discuss briefly structure of amino acids and classify amino acids on the 
basis of Nutritional and Metabolic significance. K KH Y LGT, SGT/SDL Written / Viva voce  
BC5.2 Discuss classification of proteins, structural organization, functions and 
clinical aspects. K KH Y LGT, SGT Written / Viva voce  
BC 5.3 Describe the digestion and absorption of dietary proteins
K KH Y LGT, SGT / SDL Written / Viva voce  
BC 5.4 Describe plasma proteins and their functions and brief overview  o f
normal and abnormal electrophoretic pattern of serum proteins, acute 
phase proteins. 
 
K 
 
KH 
 
Y 
 
LGT, SGT 
 
Written / Viva voce 
 
BC 5.5 Describe the structure, functions and disorders of Immunoglobul ins 
with brief description of cellular and humoral Immunity. K KH Y LGT, SGT Written / Viva voce

91 
Number COMPETENCY 
The student should be able to 
Predominant 
Domain 
K/S/A/C 
Level 
K/KH/S 
H/P 
Core 
(Y/N) 
Suggested Teaching 
Learning method 
Suggested 
Assessment 
method 
Number 
required 
to certify 
P 
BC 5.6 Describe the formation, transport, detoxification of Ammonia,
Ammonia toxicity and its clinical significance. K KH Y LGT, SGT Written / Viva voce  
BC 5.7 Describe the specialized products formed from the amino acids Glycine,
Phenylalanine, Tyrosine, Tryptophan, and Methionine, branched c hain
amino acids and Arginine and the inborn errors associated with them.
Discuss new-born screening. 
 
K/S 
 
KH/SH 
 
Y 
 
LGT, SGT 
 
Written / Viva voce 
 
BC5.8 Describe the structure and functions of haem in the body and describe 
the processes involved in its metabolism with emphasis on jaundice 
and describe porphyrin metabolism. 
 
K 
 
KH 
 
Y 
 
LGT, SGT 
 
Written / Viva voce 
 
BC5.9 Describe the major types of Hemoglobin and its types, derivativ es & 
variants found in the body and their physiological / pathologic al 
relevance 
K K H Y LGT, SGT Written / Viva voce  
Topic 6: Extracellular Matrix Number of competencies: (03) Numb er of competencies that require certification: (NIL) 
BC6.1 Enumerate the functions and components of the extracellular matrix 
(ECM). 
K K H Y LGT, SGT Written/Viva voce  
BC6.2 Discuss the involvement of ECM components in health and disease. K K H Y LGT, SGT Written/Viva voce  
BC6.3 D e s c r i b e  p r o t e i n  t a r g e t i n g  &  s o r t i n g  a l o n g  w i t h  i t s  a s s o c i a t e d  
disorders. 
K K H N LGT, SGT Written/Viva voce  
Topic 7: Integration of Metabolism and Biological Oxidation Number of co mpetencies: (02) Number of competencies that require certificat ion: (NIL) 
BC7.1 Describe the integration of various metabolic processes in the body 
(Carbohydrate, Lipid, and Protein). 
K K H Y LGT, SGT Written/viva voce  
BC7.2 Describe the Biochemical processes involved in generation of energy in 
cells. 
K K H Y LGT, SGT Written/Viva voce  
Topic 8: Vitamins and Nutrition Number of competencies: (06) Nu mber of competencies that require certification: (NIL)

92 
Number COMPETENCY 
The student should be able to 
Predominant 
Domain 
K/S/A/C 
Level 
K/KH/S 
H/P 
Core 
(Y/N) 
Suggested Teaching 
Learning method 
Suggested 
Assessment 
method 
Number 
required 
to certify 
P 
BC8.1 Describe the Biochemical role of vitamins in the body and explain the 
manifestations of their deficiency 
K K H Y LGT, SGT Written/Viva voce  
BC8.2 Discuss the importance of various dietary components and explai n 
importance of dietary fibre. 
K K H Y LGT, SGT, SDL Written/Viva voce  
BC8.3 Describe the types and causes of protein energy malnutrition and its 
effects. 
K K H Y LGT, SGT Written/Viva voce  
 
BC8.4 
P r o v i d e  d i e t a r y  a d v i c e  f o r  o p t i m a l  h e a l t h  i n  c h i l d h o o d  a n d  a d u lt in 
disease conditions like diabetes mellitus, coronary artery disease and in
pregnancy. 
 
K/S/C 
 
KH 
 
Y 
 
LGT, SGT / role play 
 
Written/Viva voce 
 
 
BC8.5 Describe the causes (including dietary habits), effects and health risks 
associated with being overweight/ obese / metabolic syndrome 
 
K 
 
KH 
 
Y 
 
LGT, SGT 
 
Written/Viva voce 
 
 
BC8.6 Summarize the nutritional importance of commonly used items of food 
including fruits and vegetables (macro-molecules & its importance). 
 
K 
 
KH 
 
Y LGT, SGT, Home 
assignment 
 
Written/Viva voce 
 
Topic 9: Minerals, electrolytes, Water and Acid base balance Nu mber of competencies: (03) Number of competencies that require certification: (NIL) 
 
BC9.1 
D e s c r i b e  t h e  d i e t a r y  s o u r c e s ,  a b s o r p t i o n ,  t r a n s p o r t ,  a n d  m e t a b olism,
Biochemical functions of Iron, Calcium and copper with its asso ciated
clinical disorders. 
 
K 
 
KH 
 
Y 
LGT, SGT, Home 
Assignment, Flipped class 
room 
 
Written/Viva voce 
 
BC9.2 Discuss Magnesium, Zinc and Phosphorus along with its clinical 
significance and discuss the functions of trace elements K KH Y LGT, SGT, Home 
Assignment. / SDL Written/Viva voce 
 
 
BC9.3 
Describe the processes involved in maintenance of normal pH, water 
& electrolyte balance of body fluids and the derangements associated 
with them 
 
K 
 
KH 
 
Y 
 
LGT, SGT / SDL 
 
Written/Viva voce

93 
Number COMPETENCY 
The student should be able to 
Predominant 
Domain 
K/S/A/C 
Level 
K/KH/S 
H/P 
Core 
(Y/N) 
Suggested Teaching 
Learning method 
Suggested 
Assessment 
method 
Number 
required 
to certify 
P 
Topic 10: Molecular Biology Number of competencies:(07) Number of competencies that require certification:(NIL) 
BC10.1 Describe nucleotides and nucleic acids and their clinical significance. K KH Y LGT, SGT Written/Viva voce  
BC10.2 Describe briefly synthesis of purines in the body with special stress on 
salvage pathway. K KH N LGT, SGT /SDL Written/Viva voce 
 
 
BC10.3 Describe the degradation of purines and its significance with associated 
disorders. 
 
K 
 
KH 
 
Y 
 
LGT, SGT 
 
Written/Viva voce 
 
BC10.4 Describe in brief the major steps involved in Replication, Transcription, 
and translation. K KH Y 
 
LGT, SGT Written/Viva voce 
 
BC 10.5 Describe the types of DNA repair, gene mutations and associated  
disorders. K KH Y LGT, SGT Written/Viva voce 
 
BC10.6 Describe basic mechanism of regulation of gene expression K KH Y LGT, SGT /SDL Written/Viva voce  
 
BC10.7 
Describe applications of molecular technologies like recombinant DNA 
technology and PCR in the diagnosis and treatment of diseases. Briefly 
discuss microarray, FISH, CRISPR 
 
K 
 
KH 
 
Y 
 
LGT, SGT, Flipped class 
room 
 
Written/Viva voce 
 
Topic 11: Organ Function tests and Hormones Number of competenc ies:(02) Number of competencies that require certification:(NIL ) 
BC 11.1 Describe the function tests of kidney, liver, thyroid and adrenal glands 
and their clinical significance. Interpret the function tests report. K,S KH/SH Y LGT, SGT, Case studies / 
SDL 
Written/Viva 
voce/Case 
studies/OSPE

94 
Number COMPETENCY 
The student should be able to 
Predominant 
Domain 
K/S/A/C 
Level 
K/KH/S 
H/P 
Core 
(Y/N) 
Suggested Teaching 
Learning method 
Suggested 
Assessment 
method 
Number 
required 
to certify 
P 
 
BC11.2 
Enumerate the hormones and markers related to reproduction and
reproductive health and their clinical interpretation (For e.g.  LH, FSH,
Prolactin, beta-HCG, Estrogen Progesterone, testosterone and AM H.
Discuss importance of prenatal screening. 
 
K 
 
KH 
 
Y 
 
LGT, SGT / SDL, Flipped 
class room 
 
Written/Viva 
voce/Direct 
observation/ OSPE 
 
Topic 12: Xenobiotic, oxidative stress and antioxidants Number of competencies:(03) Number of competencies that require certif ication:(NIL) 
BC12.1 Describe the role of xenobiotics in disease in health an d disease K KH Y LGT, SGT Written/Viva voce  
BC12.2 Describe the anti-oxidant defense systems in the body. K  K H  Y  LGT, SGT Written/Viva voce  
BC12.3 Describe the role of oxidative stress in the pathogenesis of conditions 
such as cancer, complications of diabetes mellitus and atherosclerosis K KH Y LGT, SGT / SDL Written/Viva voce 
 
Topic 13: Miscellaneous Number of competencies:(05) Number of c ompetencies that require certification:(NIL) 
BC 13.1 Describe oncogenesis, oncogenes & its activation with focus on p53 & 
apoptosis. K KH Y LGT, SGT Written/Viva voce 
 
BC 13.2 D e s c r i b e  v a r i o u s  B i o c h e m i c a l  t u m o r  m a r k e r s  a n d  t h e  B i o c h e m i c a l  
basis of cancer therapy. K KH Y LGT, SGT Written/Viva voce 
 
BC13.3 Discuss briefly on HIV and Biochemical changes in AIDS. K KH N LGT, SGT Written/Viva voce  
BC13.4 Discuss metabolism of alcohol with Biochemical changes and effects 
of chronic alcoholism. K KH Y LGT, SGT, SDL Written/Viva voce 
 
BC13.5 Describe the role of Artificial Intelligence in clinical Bioche mistry 
laboratory practices. K KH N LGT, SGT / SDL Written/ Viva voce 
Logbook Record

95 
Number COMPETENCY 
The student should be able to 
Predominant 
Domain 
K/S/A/C 
Level 
K/KH/S 
H/P 
Core 
(Y/N) 
Suggested Teaching 
Learning method 
Suggested 
Assessment 
method 
Number 
required 
to certify 
P 
Topic 14: Biochemical Laboratory test / Practical Number of com petencies: (24) Number of competencies that require certificati on : (11) 
 
14.1 Describe commonly used laborator y apparatus equipments, good / 
safe laboratory practice, Biomedical hazards & waste management. 
 
K 
 
KH 
 
Y 
 
LGT, SGT Written/ Viva voce/ 
Direct observation 
 
 
BC14.2 Describe estimation of pH by pH meter or ABG analyser and 
interpretation of results with paper case scenarios. 
 
K 
 
KH 
 
Y 
 
LGT, SGT / Case discussion 
Written/ 
Viva voce Direct 
observation/ OSPE 
 
 
 
BC14.3 
Describe the physical properties, chemical constituents of norm al 
urine and abnormal constituents of urine and Perform urine anal ysis 
to determine normal and abnormal constituents (including dipsti cks 
method demonstration). 
 
 
K,S 
 
 
KH/P 
 
 
Y 
 
LGT, Small group 
Discussion / DOAP 
 
Written/ 
Viva voce / DOAP 
 
 
2 
 
BC14.4 Identify abnormal constituents in urine, interpret the findings  a n d  
correlate these with pathological states and prepare a urine report. 
 
S 
 
P 
 
Y 
 
DOAPs Skill assessment / 
OSPE 
 
1 
 
BC14.5 Describe screening of urine for inborn errors & describe the use of 
paper chromatography 
 
K 
 
KH 
 
Y 
 
LGT, SGT 
Written/ 
Viva voce/ Direct 
observation/ OSPE 
 
 
BC14.6 
 
Describe the principles of Colorimetry & Spectrophotometry. 
 
K 
 
KH 
 
Y 
 
LGT, SGT 
Written / 
Viva voce / Direct 
observation 
 
BC14.7 
Perform estimation of glucose by manual / semi-automated analyzer 
method and demonstrate glucometer usage. and interpretation of 
results with clinical scenarios. 
S P Y DOAPs Skill Assessment 
OSPE 1 
BC14.8 Perform estimation of urea and calculate BUN and interpretation of 
results in clinical scenarios. S P Y DOAPs Skill Assessment 
OSPE 1

96 
Number COMPETENCY 
The student should be able to 
Predominant 
Domain 
K/S/A/C 
Level 
K/KH/S 
H/P 
Core 
(Y/N) 
Suggested Teaching 
Learning method 
Suggested 
Assessment 
method 
Number 
required 
to certify 
P 
BC14.9 Perform the estimation of serum creatinine and calculate creatinine 
clearance. S P Y DOAP Skill Assessment 
OSPE 1 
BC14.10 Perform estimation of uric acid in serum and interpretation of results 
with clinical scenarios. S P Y DOAPs Skill Assessment 
OSPE 1 
BC14.11 Perform estimation of serum proteins, albumin and A:G r atio S P Y DOAPs Skill Assessment 
OSPE 1 
BC14.12 Perform the estimation of serum total cholesterol S P Y  D O A P s  
Skill Assessment 
OSPE 1 
 
BC14.13 Perform the estimation of serum Bilirubin by manual / semi- 
automated analyzer method. 
 
S 
 
P 
 
Y 
 
DOAP Skills assessment / 
OSPE 
 
1 
 
BC14.14 Describe estimation of calcium and phosphorus and interpretation of 
results. 
 
K 
 
KH 
 
Y 
 
LGT, SGT, Demonstration Written / 
Viva voce 
 
 
BC14.15 Describe the estimation Triglycerides, HDL and calculation of LDL and 
interpretation of results with clinical scenarios. 
 
K 
 
KH 
 
Y 
 
LGT, SGT 
Written / 
Viva voce / OSPE 
(LDL Calculate) 
 
 
BC14.16 D e s c r i b e  t h e  e s t i m a t i o n  o f  S G O T  ( A S T )  /  S G P T  ( A L T )  /  A l k a l i n e  
Phosphatase and interpretation of results with clinical scenarios. 
 
K 
 
KH 
 
Y 
 
LGT, SGT Written/ 
Viva voce 
 
 
BC14.17 
 
Describe briefly various body fluids & discuss the composition of CSF. 
 
K 
 
KH 
 
Y 
 
LGT, SGT Written/ 
Viva voce 
 
 
 
BC14.18 
Observe use of commonly used equipments/techniques in 
Biochemistry laboratory including: 
• pH meter 
• Paper chromatography of amino acid 
• Protein electrophoresis 
 
 
K 
 
 
KH 
 
 
Y 
 
Demonstration (SGT) & 
Lab Visit 
Written/ 
Viva voce / Direct 
observation

97 
Number COMPETENCY 
The student should be able to 
Predominant 
Domain 
K/S/A/C 
Level 
K/KH/S 
H/P 
Core 
(Y/N) 
Suggested Teaching 
Learning method 
Suggested 
Assessment 
method 
Number 
required 
to certify 
P 
 • TLC, PAGE 
• Electrolyte analysis by ISE 
• ABG analyzer 
• ELISA 
• Immunodiffusion 
• Autoanalyser 
• DNA isolation from blood/ tissue 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
BC14.19 
Explain the basis and rationale of Biochemical tests done and 
interpretation of laboratory results in the following conditions: 
- Diabetes mellitus, 
- Obesity, 
- dyslipidaemia, 
- Fatty liver 
- myocardial infarction, 
- Renal failure, 
- Gout, 
- Nephrotic syndrome, 
- Jaundice, 
- Liver diseases, pancreatitis, disorders of acid- base balance, 
- Thyroid disorders, 
- Genetic disorders 
- Nutritional disorders 
- Vitamin deficiency disorders, 
- Disorders of Mineral metabolism, 
- Disorders of electrolyte metabolism. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
K 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
KH 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Y 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LGT/ Clinical case studies 
discussion 
(SGT) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Written/ 
Viva voce / OSPE / 
Case studies 
interpretation 
 
 
BC14.20 Describe & Identify Pre-Analytical (especially order of draw, 
tourniquet technique), Analytical, Post Analytical errors. 
 
S 
 
SH 
 
Y 
LGT, SGT 
DOAP(clinical lab), Skill 
lab 
Written/ 
Viva voce/ OSPE/ 
Direct observation/ 
OSPE

98 
Number COMPETENCY 
The student should be able to 
Predominant 
Domain 
K/S/A/C 
Level 
K/KH/S 
H/P 
Core 
(Y/N) 
Suggested Teaching 
Learning method 
Suggested 
Assessment 
method 
Number 
required 
to certify 
P 
 
BC14.21 
 
Describe Quality control and identify basic L J charts in Clini cal 
biochemistry lab. 
 
S 
 
SH 
 
Y 
 
LGT / SGT / DOAP (clinical 
lab) 
Written/ 
Viva voce/ OSPE/ 
Direct observation/ 
OSPE 
 
1 
 
 
BC14.22 
 
 
Describe performance of OGTT, Gl ucose Challenge Test and HbA1c 
and interpretation of results with clinical scenarios. 
 
 
K 
 
 
KH 
 
 
Y 
 
 
LGT, SGT 
Written/ 
Viva voce/ OSPE 
/Direct 
observation/ Case 
studies 
interpretation. 
 
 
BC14.23 
Calculate energy content of different food Items, identify food items 
with high and low glycaemic index and explain the importance of  
these in the diet. 
 
K 
 
KH 
 
Y 
 
LGT, SGT 
 
Written/ Viva voce 
 
BC 
14.24 
Observe, Interpret and discuss the baseline, diagnostic, progno stic, 
and discharge investigations of clinical biochemistry. K,A,S,C SH Y 
ECE-SGT(Bedside/ Ward 
visit/ Medical record 
department 
Logbook, 
reflections

99 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PHARMACOLOGY (CODE: PH)

100 
Number COMPETENCY 
The student should be able to 
Predominant 
Domain 
K/S/A/C 
Level 
K/KH/S 
H/P 
Core 
(Y/N) 
Suggested Teaching 
Learning method 
Suggested 
Assessment 
method 
Number 
required 
to certify 
P 
PHARMACOLOGY (Topics = 10, Competencies = 92) 
Topic 1: General Pharmacology (GP) Number of competencies: (13) Number of competencies that requir e certification : (04) 
PH1.1 Describe the principles of pharmacology, pharmacotherapeutics and 
define various terms in pharmacology. 
K KH Y LGT/ SGT Written, Tutorial  
PH1.2 Describe evidence based medicine and rational use of drugs & discuss 
why these are relevant to therapeutics. 
K KH Y LGT/ SGT Written, Tutorial  
PH1.3 Describe nomenclature of drugs i.e., generic, branded drugs and  
scheduled drugs, explaining the utility of the nomenclature, co st 
effectiveness and use. 
K KH Y LGT/ Practical Written, Tutorial  
PH1.4 Identify the common drug formulations and drug delivery systems , 
demonstrate their use and describe their advantages and 
disadvantages. 
K,S,A,C KH, SH Y SGT, DOAP, role plays/ 
Simulations (mannequins, 
hybrid, computer) 
Written/ Viva voce 
/ Tutorial /OSPE/ 
direct observation 
1 
PH1.5 Describe various routes of drug administration, their advantagesand 
disadvantages and demonstrate administration of, e.g., SC, IV, IM, SL, 
rectal, spinal, sublingual, intranasal sprays and inhalers 
K, S,A,C KH, SH Y SGT, videos, DOAP, 
simulations, hybrid models 
Written/ Viva 
voce/Tutorial/ 
OSPE 
2 
PH1.6 Describe salient features of absorption, distribution, metabolism and 
excretion of drugs with emphasis on various routes of drug 
administration 
K KH Y LGT/ SGT, CBL, Simulations, 
practical exercises, Graphs, 
Flipped class room 
Written/ Tutorial  
PH1.7 Describe various principles of mechanism of action of dru gs K KH Y LGT, Small Group 
discussion, Demonstration 
Written/ Viva voce/ 
OSPE 
 
PH1.8 Demonstrate the mechanism of action & effects of common 
prototype drugs on human body using computer assisted learning 
S,K KH/SH Y Animations, videos OSPE

101 
Number COMPETENCY 
The student should be able to 
Predominant 
Domain 
K/S/A/C 
Level 
K/KH/S 
H/P 
Core 
(Y/N) 
Suggested Teaching 
Learning method 
Suggested 
Assessment 
method 
Number 
required 
to certify 
P 
PH 1.9 Select rational drug combinations based on the 
pharmacokinetics/pharmacodynamic (PK/PD) parameters with 
emphasis on synergism, antagonism, ‘therapeutic efficacy’, risk  
benefit ratio 
K KH,SH Y LGT, SGT, demonstrations, 
CBL, Flipped class room 
Written, OSPE, Viva 
voce/Tutorial 
 
PH1.10 Describe changes in pharmacology of drugs in geriatric, pediatric and 
special situations such as Pregnancy, lactation, hepatic and re nal 
disorders and adjust the drug treatment accordingly. 
K, S, A KH, SH Y LGT, CBL/ PBL Written/ Tutorial, 
OSPE 
 
PH 1.11 Define Adverse Drug Reactions (ADRs) & their types. Identify the ADRs 
in the given case scenario and assess causality. 
K KH, SH Y LGT, SGT, CBL Written, Viva 
voce/Tutorial, 
OSPE 
 
PH1.12 Define Pharmacovigilance its principles and demonstrate ADR 
reporting 
K, S, C KH, SH Y LGT, DOAP, CBL, Can be 
covered in Pandemic 
module sessions 
Written/ Viva voce 
OSPE 
2 
PH1.13 Identify and describe the management of drug interaction s K KH, SH Y LGT, SGT/ CBL Written/Viva/ 
Tutorial/ 
Prescription audit 
1 
Topic 2 : Autonomic & Peripheral Nervous system, Autacoids Numb er of competencies: (8) Number of competencies that require cer tification : (NIL) 
PH2.1 Describe types, salient pharmac okinetics, pharmacodynamics, 
therapeutic uses, adverse drug reactions of adrenergic and 
antiadrenergic drugs 
K KH Y LGT, SGT Written/ Tutorial  
PH2.2 Describe types, salient pharmac okinetics, pharmacodynamics, 
therapeutic uses, adverse drug reactions of cholinergic and 
anticholinergic drugs and demonstrate OPC poisoning management 
K,S,A,C KH, SH Y LGT, SGT, Simulations, Role 
play, CBL 
Written/ Tutorial/ 
Direct observations 
 
PH 2.3 Explain the rationale and demonstrate the emergency use of vari ous 
sympathetic and parasympathetic drug agonists/antagonists (like  
Noradrenaline/ Adrenaline/Dopa mine/Dobutamine, Atropine) in 
case-based scenarios 
S,A,C KH,SH Y CBL, SGT, Simulations, Written/ Viva/ 
Tutorial/ OSCE

102 
Number COMPETENCY 
The student should be able to 
Predominant 
Domain 
K/S/A/C 
Level 
K/KH/S 
H/P 
Core 
(Y/N) 
Suggested Teaching 
Learning method 
Suggested 
Assessment 
method 
Number 
required 
to certify 
P 
PH2.4 Explain salient pharmacokinetics, pharmacodynamics, thera peutic 
uses, adverse drug reactions of skeletal muscle relaxants 
K KH Y LGT, SGT Written/ Viva 
voce/Tutorial 
 
PH2.5 Explain types, salient pharmacokinetics, pharmacodynamics, 
therapeutic uses, adverse drug r eactions of local anaesthetics (LA) & 
demonstrate various methods of administration of LA 
K, S KH, SH Y LGT, SGT, DOAP in 
simulated environment 
Written/ Viva 
voce/Tutorial, 
OSPE 
 
PH2.6 Explain types, salient pharmacokinetics, pharmacodynamics, 
therapeutic uses, adverse drug re actions of anti-histaminics an d 
explain management of common cold & allergic rhinitis. 
K KH Y LGT, CBL Written/ Viva voce/ 
Tutorial 
 
PH2.7 Define pain and enumerate drugs used for pain. Explain salient 
pharmacokinetics, pharmacodynamic s, therapeutic uses, adverse 
drug reactions of analgesics including NSAIDs ( except opioids) 
K KH Y LGT, SGT, Flipped class 
room 
Written/ Viva 
voce/Tutorial 
 
PH2.8 Devise management plan for a cas e of gout, arthritis and migrai ne 
using appropriate drugs 
K, S KH, SH Y LGT, CBL, PBL, prescription 
writing 
Written/ Viva 
voce/Tutorial, 
prescription audit 
 
Topic 3: Central Nervous system Number of competencies: (09) Nu mber of competencies that require certification : (NIL) 
PH3.1 Describe types, salient pharmacokinetics, pharmacodynamics, 
therapeutic uses, adverse drug reactions of General anaesthetics, and 
pre-anaesthetic medications 
K KH Y LGT, SGT, Flipped class 
room 
Written/ Tutorial  
PH3.2 Describe types, salient pharmac okinetics, pharmacodynamics, 
therapeutic uses, adverse drug reactions of different sedative and 
hypnotic agents and explain pharmacological basis of selection and 
use of different sedative and hypnotic agents 
K KH Y LGT, CBL/ PBL, prescription 
writing 
Written/ Viva 
voce/Tutorial, 
prescription audit 
 
PH3.3 Describe types, salient pharmac okinetics, pharmacodynamics, 
therapeutic uses, adverse drug reactions of drugs used in epilepsy and 
devise management plan for a case of uncontrolled seizure 
K, S,A,C KH, SH Y LGT, CBL/PBL/ Bedside 
teaching, prescription 
writing 
Written/ Viva voce/ 
Tutorial, 
prescription audit

103 
Number COMPETENCY 
The student should be able to 
Predominant 
Domain 
K/S/A/C 
Level 
K/KH/S 
H/P 
Core 
(Y/N) 
Suggested Teaching 
Learning method 
Suggested 
Assessment 
method 
Number 
required 
to certify 
P 
PH3.4 Describe types, salient pharmac okinetics, pharmacodynamics, 
therapeutic uses, adverse drug reactions of drugs of opioid analgesics 
and explain the special instructions for use of opioids. 
K, C KH, SH Y LGT, CBL/PBL/ Bedside 
teaching 
Written/ Viva 
voce/Tutorial/ 
Direct observation 
 
PH3.5 Describe types, salient pharmac okinetics, pharmacodynamics, 
therapeutic uses, adverse drug reactions of drugs used for depression 
and psychosis, devise management plan for depressive and psycho tic 
disorders 
K, A, C KH, SH Y LGT, CBL/PBL/ Bedside 
teaching, prescription 
writing 
Written/ Viva voce/ 
prescription audit 
 
PH3.6 Describe types, salient pharmac okinetics, pharmacodynamics, 
therapeutic uses, adverse drug reactions of drugs used in anxie ty 
disorders. Discuss about general goals of Pharmacotherapy for t he 
management of above disorders 
K, A,C KH, SH Y LGT, CBD, Bedside 
teaching, prescription 
writing 
Written/ Viva voce, 
prescription audit 
 
PH3.7 Explain types, salient pharmacokinetics, pharmacodynamics, 
therapeutic uses, adverse drug reactions of drugs used for 
Parkinsonism and other neurodegenerative disorders. Write a 
prescription to manage a case of drug induced parkinsonism 
K KH Y LGT, Problem/ case-based 
group discussion, 
prescription writing 
Written/ Viva voce, 
prescription audit 
 
PH3.8 Identify and manage methanol poisoning and chronic ethanol 
intoxication 
K, S,A,C KH, SH Y LGT, SGT, CBL, bedside 
teaching 
Written/ Viva voce, 
direct observation 
 
PH3.9 Describe the drugs that are abused and cause addiction (dependence, 
addiction, stimulants, depressants, psychedelics, drugs used fo r 
criminal offences). Explain the process and steps for managemen t of 
drug de addiction 
K KH Y LGT, SGT/CBL, Simulations, 
Flipped class room 
Written/ Viva 
voce/Tutorial 
 
Topic 4: Cardiovascular system & Blood Number of competencies: (11) Number of competencies that require certification : (NIL) 
PH4.1 Explain  types, salient  pharmacokinetics, pharmacodynami cs, 
therapeutic uses, adverse drug reactions of drugs used for different 
anaemias and thrombocytopenia. 
K KH Y LGT, integration module, 
CBL, SDL, Prescription 
writing 
Written/ Tutorial/ 
Prescription audit 
Anemia 
Integration

104 
PH4.2 Explain types, salient pharmacokinetics, pharmacodynamics, 
therapeutic uses, adverse drug reactions of drugs acting on 
coagulation system (Coagulants/anticoagulants) and devise a pla n to 
monitor therapy and management of adverse effects. 
K, A, C KH, SH Y LGT, SGT, bedside teaching Written/Viva voce/ 
Direct observation 
 
Number COMPETENCY 
The student should be able to 
Predominant 
Domain 
K/S/A/C 
Level 
K/KH/S 
H/P 
Core 
(Y/N) 
Suggested Teaching 
Learning method 
Suggested 
Assessment 
method 
Number 
required 
to certify 
P 
PH4.3 Describe types, salient pharmac okinetics, pharmacodynamics, 
therapeutic uses, adverse drug reactions of Fibrinolytics and 
Antifibrinolytic agents. 
K KH Y LGT, SGT Written/Tutorial  
PH4.4 Explain types, salient pharmac okinetics, pharmacodynamics, 
therapeutic uses, adverse drug reactions of Antiplatelets agents. 
K KH Y LGT, CBL, Flipped class 
room 
Written/Tutorial  
PH4.5 Explain types, salient pharmacokinetics, pharmacodynamics, 
therapeutic uses, adverse drug reactions of Diuretics, antidiur etics- 
vasopressin and analogues 
K KH Y LGT, SGT Written/ Tutorial  
PH4.6 Explain salient pharmacokinetics, pharmacodynamics, thera peutic 
uses, adverse drug reactions of drugs modulating renin angioten sin 
aldosterone system. 
K KH Y LGT, SGT Written/ Tutorial  
PH4.7 Explain types, salient pharmacokinetics, pharmacodynamics, 
therapeutic uses, adverse drug reactions of drugs used for the 
management of hypertension 
Devise plan for pharmacologic man agement of hypertension with 
Diabetes, Pregnancy induced hypertension and hypertensive 
emergency and urgency 
K KH Y LGT, CBL/PBL, prescription 
writing, Simulations 
Written/ Viva 
voce/Tutorial 
prescription audit/ 
Direct observations 
 
PH4.8 Describe types, salient pharmac okinetics, pharmacodynamics, 
therapeutic uses, adverse drug reactions of drugs used for the 
management of ischemic heart disease (stable, unstable angina a nd 
myocardial infarction), peripheral vascular disease and devise 
management plan for a patient of acute myocardial Infarction 
K, S,A,C KH, SH Y LGT, CBL, Simulations, 
prescription writing 
Written/ Viva voce/ 
Direct 
observations, audit 
of prescriptions

105 
PH4.9 Explain salient pharmacokinetics, pharmacodynamics, therapeutic  
uses, adverse drug reactions of drugs used for the management o f 
heart failure. Devise management plan for heart failure patient s and 
describe the strategies to prevent long term complications of h eart 
failure. 
K, A,C KH Y LGT, CBL, PBL, SDL, 
prescription writing 
Written/ Viva voce/ 
prescription audit 
 
Number COMPETENCY 
The student should be able to 
Predominant 
Domain 
K/S/A/C 
Level 
K/KH/S 
H/P 
Core 
(Y/N) 
Suggested Teaching 
Learning method 
Suggested 
Assessment 
method 
Number 
required 
to certify 
P 
PH4.10 Explain salient pharmacokinetics, pharmacodynamics, therapeutic  
uses, adverse drug reactions of drugs used for cardiac arrhythm ias. 
Devise a plan to manage a patient with supraventricular, ventri cular 
arrhythmias, cardiac arrest and fibrillations 
K,S, A,C KH, SH Y LGT, SGT, CBL, SDL, 
simulations, prescription 
writing 
Written/ Viva voce/ 
direct observation/ 
prescription audit 
 
PH4.11 Explain salient pharmacokinetics, pharmacodynamics, therapeutic  
uses, adverse drug reactions of drugs used for the management o f 
dyslipidaemias and enumerate drugs leading to dyslipidaemias 
K KH Y LGT, SGT, CBL Written/ Viva voce/ 
Tutorial 
 
Topic 5: Respiratory system Number of competencies: (2) Number of competencies that require certification : (NIL) 
PH5.1 Devise management of various stages of Bronchial asthma, COPD. 
Explain salient pharmacokinetics, pharmacodynamics, therapeutic  
uses, adverse drug reactions of drugs used for the management o f 
Bronchial asthma, COPD and Rhinitis. 
K, A, C KH /SH Y LGT, SGT, Demonstration of 
devices used in Br Asthma, 
Prescription writing 
Written/ Viva voce/ 
OSPE/ Direct 
observation, 
Prescription audit 
 
PH5.2 Explain types, salient pharmacokinetics, pharmacodynamics, 
therapeutic uses, adverse drug reactions of drugs used for coug h 
management. Describe managemen t of dry & productive cough 
K KH Y LGT , SGT, Flipped class 
room 
Written/ Tutorial  
Topic 6: Gastrointestinal system Number of competencies: (5) Nu mber of competencies that require certification : (NIL) 
PH6.1 Explain types, salient pharmacokinetics, pharmacodynamics , 
therapeutic uses, adverse drug reactions of drugs used in Acid peptic 
diseases including Peptic Ulcers, GERD and devise a management plan 
for a case of peptic ulcer. 
K, KH Y LGT, SGT, Prescription 
writing 
Written/ Viva voce/ 
Tutorial, 
Prescription audit

106 
PH6.2 Describe types, salient pharmac okinetics, pharmacodynamics, 
therapeutic uses, adverse drug reactions of prokinetics & drugs  used 
for emesis and antiemetics. 
K KH Y LGT, SGT Written/ Viva voce/ 
Tutorial 
 
Number COMPETENCY 
The student should be able to 
Predominant 
Domain 
K/S/A/C 
Level 
K/KH/S 
H/P 
Core 
(Y/N) 
Suggested Teaching 
Learning method 
Suggested 
Assessment 
method 
Number 
required 
to certify 
P 
PH6.3 Describe salient pharmacokinetics, pharmacodynamics, ther apeutic 
uses, adverse drug reactions of drugs used for the management o f 
diarrhoea and devise pharmacotherapeutic plan to manage acute and 
chronic diarrhoea in adults and children. 
K, C KH, SH Y LGT, SGT, bed side 
teaching, SDL 
Written/ Viva voce, 
Direct observation, 
OSPE 
 
PH6.4 Describe salient pharmacokinetic s, pharmacodynamics, adverse dr ug 
reactions of drugs used for the management of constipation and 
devise management plan for a case of constipation 
K, C KH, C N LGT, SGT, Direct 
observation 
Written/ Tutorial  
PH6.5 Describe salient pharmacokinetic s, pharmacodynamics, adverse dr ug 
reactions of drugs used for the management of Inflammatory Bowe l 
Disease and Irritable Bowel Disorders 
K KH N LGT, SGT Written/ Tutorial  
Topic 7: Endocrine system Number of competencies: (9) Number of  competencies that require certification : (NIL) 
PH7.1 Describe the types, kinetics, dynamics, adverse drug reactions of drugs 
used in diabetes mellitus and devise management for an obese an d 
non-obese diabetic patient & also comment on prevention of 
complications of the diabetes. 
K,A KH Y LGT, CBL, SDL, SGT, 
Prescription writing 
Written/ Viva 
voce/Tutorial, 
prescription audit 
 
PH7.2 Describe the types, kinetics, dynamics, therapeutic uses,  adverse drug 
reactions of drugs used in osteoporosis and devise management plan 
for a female and male pat ient with osteoporosis. 
K KH Y LGT, CBL/ SDL/ SGT, 
Prescription writing 
Written/ Viva voce/ 
Tutorial, 
prescription audit 
 
PH7.3 Describe the types, kinetics, dynamics, adverse drug reactions of drugs 
used in thyroid Disorders and devise a management plan for a ca se 
with thyroid Disorder. 
K KH Y LGT, CBL, SDL, SGT, 
Prescription writing 
Written/ Tutorial, 
prescription audit

107 
PH7.4 Describe the types, mechanisms of action, adverse effects, indications 
and contraindications of the drugs which modify the release of 
Anterior Pituitary Hormones 
K KH N LGT Written/ Tutorial  
PH7.5 Explain the types, kinetics, dyn amics, adverse effects, indications and 
contraindications of corticosteroids and communicate to patient  the 
appropriate use of corticosteroids 
K, A,C KH, SH Y LGT, SGT/ CBL/ PBL, Role 
play 
Written/ Viva 
voce/tutorial, 
Direct observation, 
OSPE 
 
Number COMPETENCY 
The student should be able to 
Predominant 
Domain 
K/S/A/C 
Level 
K/KH/S 
H/P 
Core 
(Y/N) 
Suggested Teaching 
Learning method 
Suggested 
Assessment 
method 
Number 
required 
to certify 
P 
PH7.6 Describe the types, kinetics, dynamics, adverse effects, indica tions 
and contraindications of Androgens and drugs used of Erectile 
Dysfunction 
K KH N LGT, SGT/ CBL Written/ tutorial  
PH7.7 Explain the types, kinetic s, dynamics, adverse effects, i ndications and 
contraindications of drugs which modify Female Reproductive 
Functions including contraceptives. Explain the important instr uction 
for use of female and male contraceptives 
K,A,C KH, SH Y LGT, SDL, CBL, PBL, SGT, 
Role play 
Written/ Viva 
voce/tutorial, OSPE 
 
PH7.8 Explain the types, kinetics, dynamics, adverse effects, indications and 
contraindications of uterine relaxants and stimulants. 
K KH Y LGT, CBL, Flipped class 
room 
Written/ Tutorial  
PH7.9 Describe drugs used for treatment of Infertility K KH Y L GT, CBL Written/ tutorial  
Topic 8: Chemotherapy Number of competencies: (11) Number of co mpetencies that require certification : (NIL) 
PH8.1 Discuss general principles of chemotherapy with emphasis on 
antimicrobial resistance. 
 
K 
 
KH 
Y LGT Written/ Viva 
voce/tutorial, 
Pandemic module 
 
PH8.2 Discuss rational use of an timicrobials and describe antib iotic 
stewardship program of your institute 
 
K 
 
KH 
Y LGT, CBL, SGT, Flipped class 
room 
Written/ Viva 
voce/tutorial, 
Pandemic module

108 
PH8.3 Explain the kinetics, dynamics, adverse effects, indications of  t h e  
following antibacterial drugs: Sulphonamides Quinolones, Beta- 
lactams, Macrolides, Tetracyclines, Aminoglycosides, and newer 
antibacterial drugs 
 
K 
 
KH 
Y LGT, CBL, SGT Written/ Viva 
voce/tutorial 
 
PH8.4 Devise a pharmacotherapeutic plan for UTI and STDs and explain to 
patient the instructions and adherence to treatment. 
 
 
K,A,C 
 
 
KH, SH 
Y LGT, CBL/ PBL/ SGT, role 
play, Prescription writing 
Written/Viva 
voce/tutorial, 
OSPE/ Prescription 
audit, Direct 
observation 
 
Number COMPETENCY 
The student should be able to 
Predominant 
Domain 
K/S/A/C 
Level 
K/KH/S 
H/P 
Core 
(Y/N) 
Suggested Teaching 
Learning method 
Suggested 
Assessment 
method 
Number 
required 
to certify 
P 
PH8.5 Explain the types, kinetics, dynamics, therapeutic uses and adv erse 
effects of drugs used in tuberculosis. Devise management plan f or 
tuberculosis treatment in various categories. 
 
K 
 
KH, SH 
Y LGT, CBL, PBL, SDL, 
Prescription writing 
Written/ Viva 
voce/tutorial, 
Prescription audit 
 
PH8.6 Discuss the types, Kinetics, dynamics, adverse effects for drugs used 
for Leprosy and outline management of Lepra reactions 
 
K 
 
KH 
Y LGT/CBL. Prescription 
writing 
Written/ Viva 
voce/tutorial 
Prescription audit 
 
PH8.7 Discuss the types, Kinetics, dynamics, adverse effects of drugs used 
for following Protozoal / Vector borne diseases: 
1. Amoebiasis 
2. Kala-azar 
3. Malaria 
4. Filariasis 
 
 
K 
 
 
KH 
Y LGT SGT, CBL, Prescription 
writing 
Written/Viva 
voce/tutorial, 
Prescription audit 
 
PH8.8 Explain the types, kinetics, dynamics, adverse effects of drugs used for 
fungal infections 
 
K 
 
KH 
Y LGT SGT, CBL, Prescription 
writing 
Written/Viva 
voce/tutorial, 
Prescription 
 
PH8.9 Discuss the types, kinetic s, dynamics, adverse effects of drugs used for 
Intestinal Helminthiasis K KH Y LGT SGT, CBL, Prescription 
writing 
Written/Viva voce, 
Prescription 
 
PH8.10 Discuss the types, kinetics, dynamics, adverse effects, indications and 
contraindications of drugs used for viral diseases including HIV 
K KH Y LGT SGT, CBL, Prescription 
writing 
Written/Viva 
voce/tutorial, 
Prescription

109 
PH8.11 Describe the types, kinet ics, dynamics, adverse effects,  indications 
and contraindications of anti-cancer drugs 
. Devise plan for amelioration of anticancer drug induced toxic ity. 
K KH N LGT, SGT, CBL Written/tutorial  
Topic 9: Miscellaneous Number of competencies: (7) Number of co mpetencies that require certification : (NIL) 
PH9.1 Describe the types, kinetics, dynamics, therapeutic uses,  
adverse drug reactions of immunomodulators 
K KH N LGT/ SGT Written/ Viva voce 
/tutorial 
 
PH9.2 Describe management of common drug poisonings, insecticides, 
common stings and bites 
K KH Y LGT, CBL, Simulations Written/ Viva 
voce/tutorial, 
direct observations 
 
Number COMPETENCY 
The student should be able to 
Predominant 
Domain 
K/S/A/C 
Level 
K/KH/S 
H/P 
Core 
(Y/N) 
Suggested Teaching 
Learning method 
Suggested 
Assessment 
method 
Number 
required 
to certify 
P 
PH9.3 Describe chelating agents and make a plan for management of heavy 
metal poisoning 
K KH N LGT, CBL Written/ tutorial  
PH9.4 Describe basics of vaccine use and types of vaccines K KH  Y SGT, LGT Written/ tutorial  
PH9.5 Describe types, precautions and uses of antiseptics and d isinfectants K KH Y SGT, LGT Written/ tutorial  
PH9.6 Describe drugs used in various skin disorders like acne v ulgaris, scabies 
, pediculosis, psoriasis including sunscreens 
K KH N LGT, Prescription writing Written/ tutorial, 
Prescription audit 
 
PH9.7 Describe drugs used in glaucoma and other ocular disorders including 
topical (ocular) drug delivery systems 
K KH N LGT Written/ tutorial  
Topic 10: Applied Pharmacology Number of competencies: (17) Num ber of competencies that require certification : (7) 
PH10.1 Compare and contrast different sources of drug information and 
update on latest information on drugs 
K, C KH, SH Y SGT, Practicals, Debate Written, OSPE 2 
PH10.2 Perform a critical evaluation of the drug promotional li terature and 
Interpret the package insert inf ormation contained in the drug 
package 
K KH/SH Y CBL, SGT, Debate Written, OSPE 1 
PH10.3 To prepare and explain a list of P-drugs for a given cas e/condition S,K,C SH/KH Y CBL, SGT OSPE, written 2

110 
PH10.4 Describe parts of a correct, rational and legible prescription and write 
rational prescriptions for the provided condition. (examples of  
conditions to be used are given with other relevant competencies) 
 
K 
 
KH, SH 
 
Y 
Practical, DOAP, CBL, 
prescription writing 
Written/ Viva 
voce/tutorial 
prescription audit 
5 
PH10.5 Identify and apply the legal and ethical regulation of p rescribing drugs 
especially when prescribing for controlled drugs, off-label medicines, 
and prescribing for self, close family and friends 
 
K 
 
KH 
 
Y 
SGT, CBL short note/ Viva 
voce/tutorial 
 
PH10.6 Perform a critical appraisal of a given prescription and suggest ways 
to improve it SK KH Y CBL, SGT, prescription 
critique 
Written, Viva voce, 
OSPE 
 
PH10.7 Describe Pharmacogenomics  and Pharmacoeconomics and mana ge 
genomic & economic issues in drug use and find out the price of given 
medication(s). 
 
K 
 
KH, SH 
 
N 
LGT, SGT, Written/ Viva voce  
Number COMPETENCY 
The student should be able to 
Predominant 
Domain 
K/S/A/C 
Level 
K/KH/S 
H/P 
Core 
(Y/N) 
Suggested Teaching 
Learning method 
Suggested 
Assessment 
method 
Number 
required 
to certify 
P 
PH10.8 Describe Essential medici n e s ,  F i x e d  d o s e  c o m b i n a t i o n ,  O ver the 
counter drugs and explain steps to choose essential medicines. K KH, SH Y SGT, DOAP, Debate Written/ Viva voce/ 
OSPE 
 
PH10.9 Calculate the dosage of drugs for an individual patient, includ ing 
children, elderly, pregnant and lactating women and patients wi th 
renal or hepatic dysfunction. 
 
K,S 
 
SH 
 
Y 
LGT, practical Written/ OSPE 1 
PH10.10 
Identify when therapeutic drug monitoring is considered for a particular 
patient, determine timing of sampling and calculate revised dose. 
K  
KH 
 
N LGT, SGT/CBL Written, OSPE 
 
PH10.11 Identify and apply drug Regulations principles, acts an d legal aspects 
related of drug discovery and clinical use  
K 
 
KH/SH 
 
Y 
LGT, Visit to clinical 
research facility, Can be 
covered in Pandemic 
module sessions 
Written/ Viva voce/ 
tutorial 
 
PH10.12 Describe overview of drug development including phases of clini cal 
trials and Good Clinical Practice & reflect on the role of rese arch in 
developing new drugs 
 
K,A 
 
KH 
 
Y 
LGT, SGT, Can be covered 
in Pandemic module 
sessions 
Written/ Viva voce/ 
tutorial

111 
PH10.13 Demonstrate  how to optimize interaction with pharmaceutical 
representative/media to get/disseminate authentic information o n 
drugs 
 
C,A,K 
 
SH 
 
Y 
Role Play, Videos, actual 
encounters 
Direct observation, 
OSPE 
2 
PH10.14 Communicate with the patient regarding optimal use of a drug therapy 
using empathy and professionalism e.g. Oral contraceptives, ant i TB 
drugs etc. 
A,C SH Y Role Play, Videos, actual 
encounters 
OSPE, Direct 
observation 
 
PH10.15 Describe methods to improve adherence to treatment and motivate 
p a t i e n t s   w i t h   c h r o n i c   d i s e a s e s   t o   a d h e r e   t o   t h e   p r e s c r ibed 
pharmacotherapy 
K,C,A SH Y Role Play, Videos, actual 
encounters 
Written/ OSPE, 
Direct observation 
2 
PH10.16 Demonstrate an understanding of the caution in prescrib ing drugs 
likely to produce dependence and recommend the line of 
management 
K,C KH,SH Y SGT, CBL Written/ OSPE, 
Direct observation 
 
PH10.17 Demonstrate ability to educate public & patients about various 
aspects of drug use including drug dependence and OTC drugs 
A,C SH Y Role Play, Videos, actual 
encounters, Plays 
OSPE, Direct 
observation

112 
 
 
 
 
 
PATHOLOGY (CODE: PA)

113 
Number COMPETENCY 
The student should be able to 
Predominant 
Domain 
K/S/A/C 
Level 
K/KH/S 
H/P 
Core 
(Y/N) 
Suggested Teaching 
Learning method 
Suggested 
Assessment 
method 
N 
re 
to 
umber 
quired 
certify 
P 
 
PATHOLOGY (Topics = 35, Competencies = 182) 
Topic 1: Introduction to Pathology Number of competencies: (3) Number of competencies that require certification : (NIL) 
PA1.1 Describe the role of a pathologist in diagnosis and management of disease K K Y LGT Written/ Viva voce  
PA1.2 Enumerate common definitions and terms used in Pathology and Describe 
the history and evolution of Pathology 
K K Y LGT, SGT Written/ Viva voce  
PA1.3 Describe proliferation and cell cycle and concept of regenerative medicine 
along with role of stem cells. 
K K Y LGT, SGT Written/ Viva voce  
Topic 2: Cell Injury and Adaptation Numbe r of competencies: (08) Numbe r of competencies that require certification: (NIL) 
PA2.1 Describe the causes, mechanisms, types and effects of cell injury and their 
clinical significance 
K K H Y LGT, SGT Written/ Viva voce  
PA2.2 Describe the etiology of cell injury. Distinguish between rever sible- 
irreversible injury: mechanisms; morphology of cell injury 
K K H Y LGT, SGT Written/ Viva voce  
PA2.3 Describe morphological changes in intracellular accumulation of fats, 
proteins, carbohydrates, pigments 
K K H Y LGT, SGT Written/ Viva voce  
PA2.4 Describe and explain Cell death- types, mechanisms, necrosis, apoptosis 
(basic as contrasted with necrosis), autolysis 
K K H Y LGT, SGT Written/ Viva voce  
PA2.5 Describe types and pathology of calcifications and gangrene K K H Y LGT, SGT Written/ Viva voce  
PA2.6 Describe cellular adaptations: atrophy, hypertrophy, hyperplasi a, 
metaplasia, dysplasia and carcinoma in situ 
K K H Y LGT, SGT Written/ Viva voce  
PA2.7 Describe the mechanisms of cellular aging and apoptosis K K H N LGT, SGT Written/ Viva voce

114 
Number COMPETENCY 
The student should be able to 
Predominant 
Domain 
K/S/A/C 
Level 
K/KH/S 
H/P 
Core 
(Y/N) 
Suggested Teaching 
Learning method 
Suggested 
Assessment 
method 
Number 
required 
to certify 
P 
PA2.8 Identify and describe various forms of cell injuries with their 
manifestations and consequences in gross and microscopic specimens 
S S H Y DOAP Viva voce  
 Topic: 3 Inflammation   Number of competencies:(04) Number o f competencies that require certification: (NIL) 
PA3.1 Define and describe the general features of acute and chronic 
inflammation including stimuli, vascular and cellular events 
K K H Y LGT, SGT Written/ Viva voce  
PA3.2 Enumerate and describe the mediators of acute inflammation K K H Y LGT, SGT Written/ Viva voce  
PA3.3 Define and describe chronic inflammation including causes, type s non- 
specific and granulomatous and enumerate examples of each 
K K H Y LGT, SGT Written/ Viva voce  
PA3.4 Identify and describe acute and chronic inflammation in gross 
and microscopic specimens 
S S H Y DOAP Viva voce  
 Topic 4: Healing and repair   Number of competencies: (01) Number o f competencies that require certification:(NIL) 
PA4.1 Define and describe the process of repair and regeneration incl uding 
wound healing and its types 
K K H Y LGT, SGT Written/ Viva voce  
 Topic 5: Hemodynamic disorders   Number of competencies: (06) Number o f competencies that require certification :(NIL) 
PA5.1 Define and describe edema, 
correlations 
its  types, pathogenesis  and  clinical K K H Y LGT, SGT Written/ Viva voce  
PA5.2 Define and describe hyperemia, congestion, hemorrhage K K H Y LGT, SGT Written/ Viva voce  
PA5.3 Define and describe shock, its pathogenesis and its stage K K H Y LGT, SGT Written/ Viva voce  
PA5.4 Define and describe normal haemo stasis and the etiopathogenesis and 
consequences of thrombosis 
K K H Y LGT, SGT Written/ Viva voce  
PA5.5 Define and describe Ischemia/infarction, embolism its types, et iology, 
morphologic changes and clinical effects 
K K H Y LGT, SGT Written/ Viva voce

115 
Number COMPETENCY 
The student should be able to 
Predominant 
Domain 
K/S/A/C 
Level 
K/KH/S 
H/P 
Core 
(Y/N) 
Suggested Teaching 
Learning method 
Suggested 
Assessment 
method 
Number 
required 
to certify 
P 
PA5.6 Identify and describe the gross and microscopic features of 
infarction in a pathologic specimen 
S SH Y DOAP Viva voce  
 Topic 6: Neoplastic disorders Number of competencies: (07) Numb er of competencies that require certification: (NIL) 
PA6.1 Define and classify neoplasia. Describe the characteristics of neoplasia 
including gross, microscopy, Biological, behavior and spread.
Differentiate between benign from malignant neoplasms 
K K H Y LGT, SGT Written/ Viva voce  
PA6.2 Describe the molecular basis of cancer, role of genetic and epi genetic 
alterations with special emphasi s on common cancers like breast/ colon 
K K H Y LGT, SGT Written/ Viva voce  
PA6.3 Define and classify the carcinogens and describe the process of different 
types of carcinogenesis 
K K H Y LGT, SGT Written/ Viva voce  
PA6.4 Describe the effects of tumor on the host including para neopla stic 
syndrome 
K K H Y LGT, SGT Written/ Viva voce  
PA6.5 Describe laboratory diagnosis of cancer including molecular pro files of 
tumors, tumors markers and future of cancer diagnostics 
K K H Y LGT, SGT Written/ Viva voce  
PA6.6 Describe immunology and the immune response to cancer with its clinical 
significance – Immunotherapy 
K K H N LGT, SGT Written/ Viva voce  
PA6.7 Identify and describe the gross and microscopic features of 
Benign and malignant neoplasm in a pathologic specimen 
S SH Y DOAP Viva voce  
 Topic 7: Basic diagnostic cytology Number of competencies:(01) Nu mber of competencies that require certification:(NIL) 
PA7.1 Describe the techniques of cytology, staining & diagnostic role of cytology 
and its application in clinical care 
K K H Y LGT, SGT Written/ Viva voce  
 Topic 8: Immunopathology and AIDS Number of competencies : (06) Number of competencies that require certification: (NIL) 
PA8.1 Describe the principles and mechanisms involved in immunity K K H Y LGT, SGT Written/ Viva voce  
PA8.2 Describe the mechanism of hypersensitivity reaction K K H Y LGT, SGT Written/ Viva voce

116 
Number COMPETENCY 
The student should be able to 
Predominant 
Domain 
K/S/A/C 
Level 
K/KH/S 
H/P 
Core 
(Y/N) 
Suggested Teaching 
Learning method 
Suggested 
Assessment 
method 
Number 
required 
to certify 
P 
PA8.3 Describe the HLA system and the immune principles involved in transplant 
and mechanism of transplant rejection 
K K H Y LGT, SGT Written/ Viva voce  
PA8.4 Define autoimmunity. Enumerate autoimmune disorder and describe the 
pathogenesis of common autoimmune diseases 
K K H Y LGT, SGT Written/ Viva voce  
PA8.5 Define and describe the pathogenesis of systemic Lupus Erythematosus K K H Y LGT, SGT Written/ Viva voce  
PA8.6 Define and describe the pathogenesis and pathology of HIV and AIDS K K H Y LGT, SGT Written/ Viva voce  
 Topic 9: Amyloidosis Number o f competencies: (02) Number o f competencies that require certification:(NIL) 
PA9.1 Describe the pathogenesis and pathology of amyloidosis K K H N LGT, SGT Written/ Viva voce  
PA9.2 Identify and describe various forms of amyloidosis with their 
manifestations and consequences in gross and microscopic specimens 
S SH Y DOAP Viva voce  
 Topic 10: Infections and Infestations Number o f competencies: (05) Number o f competencies that require certification:(NIL) 
PA10.1 Define and describe the pathogenesis and pathology of malaria K K H Y LGT, SGT Written/ Viva voce  
PA10.2 Define and describe the pathogenesis and pathology of cysticercosis K K H Y LGT, SGT Written/ Viva voce  
PA10.3 Define and describe the pathogenesis and pathology of leprosy K K H Y LGT, SGT Written/ Viva voce  
PA10.4 Define and describe the pathogenesis and pathology of common bacterial, 
viral, protozoal and helminthic diseases 
K K H N LGT, SGT Written/ Viva voce  
PA10.5 Define and describe the pathogenesis and pathology and laborato ry 
findings in COVID 
K K H Y LGT, SGT Written/ Viva voce  
 Topic 11: Genetic and pediatric diseases Number o f competencies: (03) Number o f competencies that require certification :(NIL) 
PA11.1 Describe the pathogenesis and features of common cytogenetic 
abnormalities and mutations in with diagnostic modalities in childhood 
K K H N LGT, SGT Written/ Viva voce  
PA11.2 Describe the pathogenesis and pathology of tumor and tumor like  
conditions in infancy and childhood 
K K H N LGT, SGT Written/ Viva voce

117 
Number COMPETENCY 
The student should be able to 
Predominant 
Domain 
K/S/A/C 
Level 
K/KH/S 
H/P 
Core 
(Y/N) 
Suggested Teaching 
Learning method 
Suggested 
Assessment 
method 
Number 
required 
to certify 
P 
PA11.3 Describe the pathogenesis of com mon storage disorders in infanc y and 
childhood 
K K H N LGT, SGT Written/ Viva voce  
Topic 12: Environmental and nutritional diseases Number o f competencies:(03) Number o f competencies that require certification:(NIL) 
PA12.1 Enumerate and describe the pathogenesis of disorders caused by air 
pollution, tobacco, alcohol and noise 
K K H Y LGT, SGT Written/ Viva voce  
PA12.2 Describe the pathogenesis of disorders caused by protein calori e 
malnutrition, vitamins and starvation 
K K H Y LGT, SGT Written/ Viva voce  
PA12.3 Describe the pathogenesis of obesity and its consequences with special 
emphasis on metabolic syndrome 
K K H Y LGT, SGT Written/ Viva voce  
Topic 13: Introduction to hematology Number o f competencies: (04) Number o f competencies that require certification:(1) 
PA13.1 Describe hematopoiesis and extra medullary hematopoiesis and th e role 
of anticoagulants in hematology 
K K H Y LGT, SGT Written/ Viva voce  
PA13.2 Define and classify anemia Enumerate and describe the investigation of 
anemia 
K K H Y LGT, SGT Written/ Viva voce  
PA13.3 Describe collection of specimens and identify coagulants and 
anticoagulant bulbs, instruments 
S SH` Y DEMO Viva voce / OSPE  
PA13.4 Perform common haematological tests – Hb, RBC count, WBC count and 
DLC 
S SH` Y DEMO Viva voce / OSPE 4 
Topic 14: Microcytic anemia Number of competencies: (02) Number o f competencies that require certification:(1) 
PA14.1 Describe iron metabolism and Describe the etiology, investigations and 
differential diagnosis of microcytic hypochromic anemia 
K K H Y LGT, SGT Written/ Viva voce  
PA14.2 Identify and describe the peripheral smear in microcytic Anemia S SH` Y DEMO Viva voce / OSPE 1 
Topic 15: Macrocytic anemia Number o f competencies: (03) Number o f competencies that require certification: (1) 
PA15.1 Describe the metabolism of Vitamin B12 and the etiology and
pathogenesis of B12 deficiency a nd describe laboratory investig ations of
macrocytic anemia 
K K H Y LGT, SGT Written/ Viva voce

118 
Number COMPETENCY 
The student should be able to 
Predominant 
Domain 
K/S/A/C 
Level 
K/KH/S 
H/P 
Core 
(Y/N) 
Suggested Teaching 
Learning method 
Suggested 
Assessment 
method 
Number 
required 
to certify 
P 
PA15.2 Enumerate the differences and describe the etiology, laboratory features 
of megaloblastic anemia and distinguishing features of megaloblastic and 
non-megaloblastic macrocytic anemia 
K K H Y LGT, SGT Written/ Viva voce  
PA15.3 Identify and describe the peripheral blood picture of macrocytic 
Anemia 
S SH` Y DEMO Viva voce / OSPE 1 
 Topic 16: Hemolytic anemia Number o f competencies: (03) Number o f competencies that require certification: (01) 
PA16.1 Define and classify hemolytic anemia and describe the pathogenesis and 
clinical features and hematologic indices of hemolytic anemia 
K K H Y LGT, SGT Written/ Viva voce  
PA16.2 Describe the pathogenesis, features, hematologic indices and peripheral 
blood picture of sickle cell anemia and thalassemia 
K K H Y Lecture, Small group 
discussion 
Written/ Viva voce 1 
PA16.3 Describe the etiology, pathogenesis, hematologic indices and peripheral 
blood picture of Acquired hemolytic anemia and different hemolytic 
Anemia’s 
K K H Y Lecture, Small group 
discussion 
Written/ Viva voce  
 Topic 17: Aplastic anemia Number o f competencies: (01) Number o f competencies that require certification:(NIL) 
PA 17.1 Describe the etiology, pathogenesis and findings in aplastic Anemia and 
Enumerate the indications and describe the findings in bone marrow 
aspiration and biopsy 
K K N LGT, SGT Written/ Viva voce  
 Topic 18: Leukocyte disorders Number o f competencies: (02) Number o f competencies that require certification:(NIL) 
PA18.1 Enumerate and describe the causes of leukocytosis leucopenia 
lymphocytosis and leukemoid reactions 
K K H Y LGT, SGT Written/ Viva voce  
PA 18.2 Describe the etiology, genetics, pathogenesis classification, features, 
hematologic features of acute and chronic leukemia 
K K H Y LGT, SGT Written/ Viva voce  
 Topic 19: Lymph node and spleen Number of competencies: (06) Nu mber of competencies that require certification:(NIL) 
PA19.1 Enumerate the causes and describe the differentiating features of 
lymphadenopathy 
K K H Y LGT, SGT Written/ Viva voce  
PA19.2 Describe the pathogenesis and pathology of tuberculous Lymphadenitis K K H Y LGT, SGT Written/ Viva voce

119 
Number COMPETENCY 
The student should be able to 
Predominant 
Domain 
K/S/A/C 
Level 
K/KH/S 
H/P 
Core 
(Y/N) 
Suggested Teaching 
Learning method 
Suggested 
Assessment 
method 
Number 
required 
to certify 
P 
PA19.3 Describe and discuss the pathogenesis, pathology and the differentiating 
features of Hodgkin's and non-Hodgkin's lymphoma 
S SH Y DOAP Skill assessment  
PA19.4 Enumerate and differentiate the causes of splenomegaly K K H Y LGT, SGT Written/ Viva voce  
PA19.5 Identify and describe the features of tuberculous lymphadenitis 
in a gross and microscopic specimen 
S SH Y DOAP Viva voce  
PA19.6 Identify and describe the features of Hodgkin's lymphoma in a 
gross and microscopic specimen 
S SH Y DOAP Viva voce  
 Topic 20: Hemorrhagic disorders    Number of competencies: (03) Number of competencies that require  certification:(NIL) 
PA20.1 Describe normal hemostasis Classify and describe the etiology,
pathogenesis and pathology of vascular and platelet disorders i ncluding 
ITP and hemophilia’s 
K K H Y LGT, SGT Written/ Viva voce  
PA20.2 Define and describe disseminated intravascular coagulation, its laboratory 
findings and diagnosis of dissemi nated intravascular coagulatio n and 
diagnosis of Vitamin K deficiency 
S SH Y LGT, SGT Written/ Viva voce  
PA20.3 Define and describe its laboratory findings and diagnosis of Multiple 
Myeloma 
K K H Y LGT, SGT Written/ Viva voce  
 Topic 21: Blood banking and transfusion    Number of competencies: (06) Number of competencies that requir e certification: (1) 
PA21.1 Classify and describe blood group systems (ABO and RH) K K H Y LGT, SGT Written/ Viva voce  
PA21.2 Enumerate blood components and describe their clinical uses S SH Y LGT, SGT Written/ Viva voce  
PA21.3 Enumerate and describe infections transmitted by blood transfusion K K H Y LGT, SGT Written/ Viva voce  
PA21.4 Describe transfusion reactions and enumerate 
investigation of a transfusion reaction 
the steps in the K K H Y LGT, SGT Written/ Viva voce  
PA21.5 Enumerate the indications and describe the principles and procedure of 
autologous transfusion 
K K H Y LGT, SGT Written/ Viva voce  
PA21.6 Describe the correct technique to perform blood grouping 
Describe the correct technique to perform a cross match 
S SH` Y DEMO Viva voce / OSPE 1

120 
Number COMPETENCY 
The student should be able to 
Predominant 
Domain 
K/S/A/C 
Level 
K/KH/S 
H/P 
Core 
(Y/N) 
Suggested Teaching 
Learning method 
Suggested 
Assessment 
method 
Number 
required 
to certify 
P 
Topic 22: Clinical Pathology Number of competencies: (05) Number of competencies that require certification: (2) 
PA22.1 Describe abnormal urinary findings in disease states and identi fy and
describe common urinary abnormalities in a clinical specimen 
S SH Y DOAP Skill Assessment  
PA22.2 Describe abnormal findings in body fluids in various disease states K K H Y LGT, SGT Written/ Viva voce  
PA22.3 Describe and interpret the abnormalities in a panel containing semen 
analysis, thyroid function tests. 
S SH Y DOAP Skill Assessment  
PA22.4 D e s c r i b e  a n d  i n t e r p r e t  t h e  a b n o r m a l i t i e s  i n  a  p a n e l  c o n t a i n i n g  liver 
function tests 
KS KH Y LGT/DOAP Written/ Viva voce/ 
Skill Assessment 
4 
PA22.5 Describe and interpret the abnormalities in a panel containing,  r e n a l  
function tests 
KS KH Y LGT/DOAP Written/ Viva voce/ 
Skill Assessment 
4 
Topic 23: Gastrointestinal tract Number of competencies: (09) N umber of competencies that require certification: (NIL) 
PA23.1 Describe the etiology, pathogenesis, pathology and clinical features of 
oral cancers 
K K H Y LGT, SGT Written/ Viva voce  
PA23.2 Describe the etiology, pathogenesis, pathology, microbiology, clinical and 
microscopic features of carcinoma esophagus 
K K H Y LGT, SGT Written/ Viva voce  
PA23.3 Describe the etiology, pathogenesis, pathology, microbiology, clinical and 
microscopic features of peptic ulcer disease 
K K H Y LGT, SGT Written/ Viva voce  
PA23.4 Describe and etiology and pathogenesis and pathologic features of 
carcinoma of the stomach 
K K H Y LGT, SGT Written/ Viva voce  
PA23.5 Describe and etiology and pathogenesis and pathologic features of 
Tuberculosis of the intestine and appendicitis. 
K K H Y LGT, SGT Written/ Viva voce  
PA23.6 Describe and etiology and pathogenesis and pathologic and distinguishing 
features of Inflammatory bowel disease 
K K H Y LGT, SGT Written/ Viva voce  
PA23.7 Enumerate causes and describe laboratory diagnosis of malabsorption 
syndrome 
K K H N LGT, SGT Written/ Viva voce

121 
Number COMPETENCY 
The student should be able to 
Predominant 
Domain 
K/S/A/C 
Level 
K/KH/S 
H/P 
Core 
(Y/N) 
Suggested Teaching 
Learning method 
Suggested 
Assessment 
method 
Number 
required 
to certify 
P 
PA23.8 Describe the etiology, pathogenesis, pathology and distinguishing 
features of carcinoma of the colon 
K K H Y LGT, SGT Written/ Viva voce  
PA23.9 Describe and identify the microscopic features of peptic ulcer ,intestinal 
ulcers and tumours of GIT 
S SH Y DOAP Viva voce  
Topic 24: Hepatobiliary system Number o f competencies: (09) Number o f competencies that require certification: (01) 
PA24.1 Describe Bilirubin metabolism, enumerate the etiology and pathogenesis 
of jaundice, distinguish between direct and indirect hyper Bilirubinemia 
K K H Y LGT, SGT Written/ Viva voce  
PA24.2 Describe the pathophysiology and pathologic changes seen in hep atic 
failure and their clinical manifestations, complications and consequences
K K H Y LGT, SGT Written/ Viva voce  
PA24.3 Describe the etiology and pathogenesis of viral and toxic hepat itis:
distinguish the causes of hepatitis based on the clinical and l aboratory
features. Describe the pathology, complications and consequence s o f
hepatitis 
K K H Y LGT, SGT Written/ Viva voce  
PA24.4 Describe the pathophysiology, pathology and progression of alcoholic liver 
disease including cirrhosis 
K K H Y LGT, SGT Written/ Viva voce  
PA24.5 Describe the etiology, pathogenesis and complications of portal
hypertension 
K K H Y LGT, SGT Written/ Viva voce  
PA24.6 Interpret liver function and viral hepatitis serology panel. Di stinguish
obstructive from non-obstructive jaundice based on clinical fea tures and
liver function tests 
S P Y DOAP Skill assessment 1 
PA24.7 Define and describe the etiology, types, pathogenesis, morpholo gy and 
complications of Hepatocellular Carcinoma 
K K H Y LGT, SGT Written/ Viva voce  
PA24.8 Describe the pathophysiology, pathology and complications of ac ute 
cholecystitis and Cholelithiasis 
K K H Y LGT, SGT Written/ Viva voce

122 
Number COMPETENCY 
The student should be able to 
Predominant 
Domain 
K/S/A/C 
Level 
K/KH/S 
H/P 
Core 
(Y/N) 
Suggested Teaching 
Learning method 
Suggested 
Assessment 
method 
Number 
required 
to certify 
P 
PA24.9 Describe and identify the microscopic features of liver diseases and 
tumors 
S SH Y DOAP Viva voce  
Topic 25: Respiratory system Number o f competencies: (07) Number o f competencies that require certification: (NIL) 
PA25.1 Define and describe the etiology, types, pathogenesis, stages, morphology 
and complications of pneumonia 
K K H Y LGT, SGT Written/ Viva voce  
PA25.2 Describe the etiology, gross and microscopic appearance and 
complications of lung abscess 
K K H Y LGT, SGT Written/ Viva voce  
PA25.3 Define and describe the etiology, types, pathogenesis, stages morphology
and complications and evaluation of Obstructive airway disease (OAD) and
bronchiectasis 
K K H Y LGT, SGT Written/ Viva voce  
PA25.4 Define and describe the etiology, types, pathogenesis, stages, morphology 
microscopic appearance and complications of tuberculosis 
K K H Y LGT, SGT Written/ Viva voce  
PA25.5 Define and describe the etiology, types, exposure, environmenta l
influence, pathogenesis, stages, morphology, microscopic appearance and
complications of Occupational lung disease 
K K H Y LGT, SGT Written / Viva voce  
PA25.6 Define and describe the etiology, types, exposure, genetic environmental
influence, pathogenesis, stages, morphology, microscopic appear ance,
metastases and complications of tumors of the lung and pleura including 
mesothelioma 
K K H Y LGT, SGT Written/ Viva voce  
PA25.7 Identify and describe the features of diseases and tumors of lung 
in a gross and microscopic specimen 
S SH Y DOAP Viva voce  
Topic 26: Cardiovascular system Number o f competencies: (10) Number o f competencies that require certification: (NIL) 
PA26.1 Distinguish arteriosclerosis from atherosclerosis. Describe the  
pathogenesis and pathology of various causes and types of atherosclerosis 
K K H Y LGT, SGT Written/ Viva voce

123 
Number COMPETENCY 
The student should be able to 
Predominant 
Domain 
K/S/A/C 
Level 
K/KH/S 
H/P 
Core 
(Y/N) 
Suggested Teaching 
Learning method 
Suggested 
Assessment 
method 
Number 
required 
to certify 
P 
PA26.2 Describe the etiology, dynamics, pathology types and complicati ons of 
aneurysms including aortic aneurysms 
K K H Y LGT, SGT Written/ Viva voce  
PA26.3 Describe the etiology, types, stages pathophysiology, pathology  a n d  
complications of heart failure 
K K H Y LGT, SGT Written/ Viva voce  
PA26.4 Describe the etiology, pathophysiology, pathology, gross and, 
complications of Congenital heart disease 
K K H Y LGT, SGT Written/ Viva voce  
PA26.5 Describe the etiology, pathophysiology, pathology, gross and microscopic 
features, criteria and complications of rheumatic fever 
K K H Y LGT, SGT Written/ Viva voce  
PA26.6 Describe the epidemiology, risk factors, etiology, pathophysiol ogy,
pathology, presentations, gross and microscopic features, diagnostic tests
and complications of ischemic hea rt disease and Interpret abnor malities
in cardiac function testing in acute coronary syndromes 
K K H Y LGT, SGT Written/ Viva voce  
PA26.7 Describe the etiology, pathophysiology, pathology, gross and microscopic 
features, diagnosis and complications of infective endocarditis 
K K H Y LGT, SGT Written/ Viva voce  
PA26.8 Describe the etiology, pathophysiology, pathology, gross and 
microscopic features, diagnosis and complications of 
pericarditis and pericardial effusion 
S SH Y DOAP Skill Assessment  
PA26.9 Classify and describe the etiology, types, pathophysiology, 
pathology, gross and microscopic features, diagnosis and 
complications of cardiomyopathies 
K K H N LGT, SGT Written/ Viva voce  
PA26.10 Describe  the  etiology, pathophysiology, pathology features an d 
complications of tumors of cardiovascular system. 
K K H N LGT, SGT Written/ Viva voce  
Topic 27 : Urinary Tract Number o f competencies: (17) Number o f competencies that require certification: (NIL) 
PA27.1 Describe the normal histology of the kidney K K Y LGT, SGT Written/ Viva voce  
PA27.2 Define, classify and distinguish the clinical syndromes and describe the 
etiology, pathogenesis, pathology, morphology, clinical and lab oratory 
and urinary findings, complications of renal failure 
K K H Y LGT, SGT Written/ Viva voce

124 
Number COMPETENCY 
The student should be able to 
Predominant 
Domain 
K/S/A/C 
Level 
K/KH/S 
H/P 
Core 
(Y/N) 
Suggested Teaching 
Learning method 
Suggested 
Assessment 
method 
Number 
required 
to certify 
P 
PA27.3 Define and describe the etiology, precipitating factors, pathog enesis,
pathology, laboratory urinary findings, progression and complic ations of
acute renal failure 
K K H Y LGT, SGT Written/ Viva voce  
PA27.4 Define and describe the etiology, precipitating factors, pathog enesis,
pathology, laboratory urinary findings progression and complica tions o f
chronic renal failure 
K K H Y LGT, SGT Written/ Viva voce  
PA27.5 Define and classify glomerular diseases. Enumerate and describe  t he
etiology, pathogenesis, mechanisms of glomerular injury, pathol ogy,
distinguishing features and clinical manifestations of glomerulonephritis 
K K H Y LGT, SGT Written/ Viva voce  
PA27.6 Define and describe the etiology, pathogenesis, pathology, laboratory, 
urinary findings, progression and complications of IgA nephropathy 
K K H Y LGT, SGT Written/ Viva voce  
PA27.7 Enumerate and describe the findings in glomerular manifestation s of 
systemic disease 
K K H Y LGT, SGT Written/ Viva voce  
PA27.8 Enumerate and classify diseases affecting the tubular Interstitium K K H Y LGT, SGT Written/ Viva voce  
PA27.9 Define and describe the etiology, pathogenesis, pathology, laboratory, 
urinary findings, progression and complications of acute tubular necrosis 
K K H Y LGT, SGT Written/ Viva voce  
PA27.10 Describe the etiology, pathogenesis, pathology, laboratory findings,
distinguishing features progression and complications of acute and 
chronic pyelonephritis and reflux nephropathy 
K K H Y LGT, SGT Written/ Viva voce  
PA27.11 Define classify and describe the etiology, pathogenesis patholo gy, 
laboratory, urinary findings, distinguishing features progressi on and 
complications of vascular disease of the kidney 
K K H Y LGT, SGT Written/ Viva voce  
PA27.12 Define classify and describe the genetics, inheritance, etiolog y,
pathogenesis, pathology, laboratory, urinary findings, distingu ishing
features, progression and complications of cystic disease of the kidney 
K K H Y LGT, SGT Written/ Viva voce

125 
Number COMPETENCY 
The student should be able to 
Predominant 
Domain 
K/S/A/C 
Level 
K/KH/S 
H/P 
Core 
(Y/N) 
Suggested Teaching 
Learning method 
Suggested 
Assessment 
method 
Number 
required 
to certify 
P 
PA27.13 Define classify and describe the etiology, pathogenesis, pathol ogy,
laboratory, urinary findings, distinguishing features progressi on and
complications of renal stone disease and obstructive uropathy 
K K H Y LGT, SGT Written/ Viva voce  
PA27.14 Classify and describe the etiology, genetics, pathogenesis, pat hology, 
presenting features, progression and spread of renal tumors 
K K H N LGT, SGT Written/ Viva voce  
PA27.15 Describe the etiology, genetics, pathogenesis, pathology, presen ting 
features and progression of thrombotic angiopathies 
K K H N LGT, SGT Written/ Viva voce  
PA27.16 Describe the etiology, genetics, pathogenesis, pathology, prese nting 
features and progression of urothelial tumors 
K K H N LGT, SGT Written/ Viva voce  
PA27.17 Identify and describe the features of kidney diseases and tumors 
in a gross and microscopic specimen 
S SH` Y DEMO Viva voce / OSPE  
Topic 28: Male Genital Tract Number o f competencies: (06) Number o f competencies that require certification: (NIL) 
PA28.1 Classify testicular tumors and describe the pathogenesis, patho logy,
presenting and distinguishing features, diagnostic tests, progr ession and
spread of testicular tumors 
K K H Y LGT, SGT Written/ Viva voce  
PA28.2 Describe the pathogenesis, pathology, presenting and distinguis hing
features, diagnostic tests, progression and spread of carcinoma  o f  t he
penis 
K K H Y LGT, SGT Written/ Viva voce  
PA28.3 Describe the pathogenesis, pathology, hormonal dependency presenting 
and distinguishing features, urologic findings & diagnostic tests of benign 
prostatic hyperplasia 
K K H Y LGT, SGT Written/ Viva voce  
PA28.4 Describe the pathogenesis, pathology, hormonal dependency prese nting
and distinguishing features, diagnostic tests, progression and spread o f
carcinoma of the prostate 
K K H Y LGT, SGT Written/ Viva voce

126 
Number COMPETENCY 
The student should be able to 
Predominant 
Domain 
K/S/A/C 
Level 
K/KH/S 
H/P 
Core 
(Y/N) 
Suggested Teaching 
Learning method 
Suggested 
Assessment 
method 
Number 
required 
to certify 
P 
PA28.5 Describe the etiology, pathogenesis, pathology and progression of 
prostatitis 
K K H N LGT, SGT Written/ Viva voce  
PA28.6 Describe and identify the morphologic and microscopic features 
of diseases and tumors of male genital tract 
S SH Y DOAP Viva voce  
Topic 29: Female Genital Tract Number o f competencies: (10) Number o f competencies that require certification: (NIL) 
PA.29.1 Describe the epidemiology, pathogenesis, etiology, pathology, screening, 
diagnosis and progression of carcinoma of the cervix 
K K H Y LGT, SGT Written/ Viva voce  
PA29.2 Describe the pathogenesis, etiology, pathology, diagnosis and progression 
and spread of carcinoma of the endometrium 
K K H Y LGT, SGT Written/ Viva voce  
PA29.3 Describe the pathogenesis, etiology, pathology, diagnosis and progression 
and spread of carcinoma of the leiomyoma and leiomyosarcomas 
K K H Y LGT, SGT Written/ Viva voce  
PA29.4 Classify and describe the etiology, pathogenesis, pathology, morphology, 
clinical course, spread and complications of ovarian tumors 
K K H Y LGT, SGT Written/ Viva voce  
PA29.5 Describe the etiology, pathogenesis, pathology, morphology, clinical 
course, spread and complications of gestational trophoblastic neoplasms 
K K H Y LGT, SGT Written/ Viva voce  
PA29.6 Describe the etiology and morphologic features of cervicitis K K H N LGT, SGT Written/ Viva voce  
PA29.7 Describe the etiology, hormonal dependence, features and morphology of 
endometriosis 
K K H N LGT, SGT Written/ Viva voce  
PA29.8 Describe the etiology and morphologic features of adenomyosis K K H N LGT, SGT Written/ Viva voce  
PA29.9 Describe the etiology, hormonal dependence and morphology of 
endometrial hyperplasia 
K KH N LGT, SGT Written/ Viva voc e  
PA29.10 Describe and identify th e morphologic and microscopic features 
of diseases and tumors of female genital tract 
S S H Y DOAP Viva voce  
Topic 30: Breast Number of compet encies: (05) Number of compete ncies that require certification: (NIL)

127 
Number COMPETENCY 
The student should be able to 
Predominant 
Domain 
K/S/A/C 
Level 
K/KH/S 
H/P 
Core 
(Y/N) 
Suggested Teaching 
Learning method 
Suggested 
Assessment 
method 
Number 
required 
to certify 
P 
PA30.1 Classify and describe the types, etiology, pathogenesis, hormon al 
dependency of breast pathology and benign disease 
K K H Y LGT, SGT Written/ Viva voce  
PA30.2 Classify and describe the epidemi ology, pathogenesis, classific ation,
morphologic and microscopic feat ures, prognostic factors, hormo nal
dependency, staging and spread of carcinoma of the breast 
K K H Y LGT, SGT Written/ Viva voce  
PA30.3 Describe and identify the morphologic and microscopic features of 
Phyllodes tumor of the breast 
S SH N DOAP Skill Assessment  
PA30.4 Enumerate and describe the etiology, hormonal dependency and 
pathogenesis of Gynaecomastia 
K K H N LGT, SGT Written/ Viva voce  
PA30.5 Describe and identify the morphologic and microscopic features 
of benign and malignant tumors of the breast 
S SH Y DOAP Viva voce  
Topic 31: Endocrine system Number o f competencies: (10) Number o f competencies that require certification: (NIL) 
PA31.1 Enumerate, classify and describe the etiology, pathogenesis, pathology 
and iodine dependency of thyroid swellings 
K K H Y LGT, SGT Written/ Viva voce  
PA31.2 Describe the etiology, cause, iodine dependency, pathogenesis,
manifestations, laboratory and imaging features and course o f
thyrotoxicosis 
K K H Y LGT, SGT Written/ Viva voce  
PA31.3 Describe the etiology, pathogenesis, manifestations, laboratory  a n d  
imaging features and course of thyrotoxicosis/ hypothyroidism 
K K H Y LGT, Small group Written/ Viva voce  
PA31.4 Classify and describe the epidemiology, etiology, pathogenesis, pathology, 
clinical laboratory features & c omplications of Thyroid tumors 
K K H Y LGT, SGT Written/ Viva voce  
PA31.5 Classify and describe the epidemiology, etiology, pathogenesis, pathology, 
clinical laboratory features, complications and progression of diabetes 
mellitus 
K K H N LGT, SGT Written/ Viva voce  
PA31.6 Describe the etiology, genetics, pathogenesis, manifestations, laboratory 
and morphologic features of hyperparathyroidism 
K K H N LGT, SGT Written/ Viva voce

128 
Number COMPETENCY 
The student should be able to 
Predominant 
Domain 
K/S/A/C 
Level 
K/KH/S 
H/P 
Core 
(Y/N) 
Suggested Teaching 
Learning method 
Suggested 
Assessment 
method 
Number 
required 
to certify 
P 
PA31.7 Describe the etiology, pathogenesis, manifestations, laboratory , 
morphologic features, complications and metastases of pancreatic cancer 
K K H N LGT, SGT Written/ Viva voce  
PA31.8 Describe the etiology, pathogenesis, manifestations, laboratory , 
morphologic features, complications of adrenal insufficiency 
K K H N LGT, SGT Written/ Viva voce  
PA31.9 Describe the etiology, pathogenesis, manifestations, laboratory , 
morphologic features, complications of Cushing's syndrome 
K K H N LGT, SGT Written/ Viva voce  
PA31.10 Describe the etiology, pathogenesis, manifestations, laboratory  a n d  
morphologic features of adrenal neoplasms 
S SH Y DOAP Viva voce  
Topic 32: Bone and soft tissue Number o f competencies: (07) Number o f competencies
PA32.1 Classify and describe the etiology,  pathogenesis, manifestations, 
radiologic and morphologic features and complications of osteomyelitis 
K K H Y LGT, SGT Written/ Viva voce  
PA32.2 Classify and describe the etiology, pathogenesis, manifestations,
radiologic and morphologic features and complications and metastases of 
bone tumors 
K K H Y LGT, SGT Written/ Viva voce  
PA32.3 Classify and describe the etiology, pathogenesis, manifestation s,
radiologic and morphologic features and complications and metastases of
soft tissue tumors 
K K H Y LGT, SGT Written/ Viva voce  
PA32.4 Classify and describe the etiology, pathogenesis, manifestation s,
radiologic and morphologic features and complications of Paget' s disease
of the bone 
K K H N LGT, SGT Written/ Viva voce  
PA32.5 Classify and describe the etiology, immunology, pathogenesis ,
manifestations, radiologic and laboratory features, diagnostic criteria and
complications of rheumatoid arthritis 
K K H N LGT, SGT Written/ Viva voce  
PA32.6 Classify and describe the etiology, pathogenesis, manifestation s,
radiologic and laboratory features, diagnostic criteria and complications of
Osteo arthritis and Gouty arthritis 
K K H N LGT, SGT Written/ Viva voce

129 
Number COMPETENCY 
The student should be able to 
Predominant 
Domain 
K/S/A/C 
Level 
K/KH/S 
H/P 
Core 
(Y/N) 
Suggested Teaching 
Learning method 
Suggested 
Assessment 
method 
Number 
required 
to certify 
P 
PA32.7 Describe and identify the morphologic and microscopic features 
of diseases and tumors of bone 
S SH Y DOAP Viva voce  
Topic 33: Skin Number o f competencies: (04) Number o f competencies that require certification:(NIL) 
PA33.1 Describe the risk factors pathogenesis, pathology and natural history of 
squamous cell carcinoma of the skin 
K K H Y LGT, SGT Written/ Viva voce  
PA33.2 Describe the risk factors pathogenesis, pathology and natural history of 
basal cell carcinoma of the skin 
K K H Y LGT, SGT Written/ Viva voce  
PA33.3 Describe the distinguishing features between a nevus and melano ma.
Describe the etiology, pathogenesis, risk factors morphology cl inical
features and metastases of melanoma 
K K H N LGT, SGT Written/ Viva voce  
PA33.4 Identify, distinguish and describe common tumors of the skin S SH N DOAP Skill Assessment  
Topic 34: Central Nervous System Number of competencies:(03) Numb er of competencies that require certification: (01) 
PA34.1 Describe the etiology, types and pathogenesis, differentiating factors, CSF 
findings in meningitis 
K K H Y LGT, SGT Written/ Viva voce  
PA34.2 Classify and describe the etiology, genetics, pathogenesis, pathology, 
presentation sequelae and complications of CNS tumors 
K K H Y LGT, SGT Written/ Viva voce  
PA34.3 Identify the etiology of meningitis based on given CSF parameters S P Y DOAP Skill Assessment 1 
Topic 35: Eye Number o f competencies: (01) Number o f competencies that require certification: (NIL)

130 
Number COMPETENCY 
The student should be able to 
Predominant 
Domain 
K/S/A/C 
Level 
K/KH/S 
H/P 
Core 
(Y/N) 
Suggested Teaching 
Learning method 
Suggested 
Assessment 
method 
Number 
required 
to certify 
P 
PA35.1 Describe the etiology, genetics, pathogenesis, pathology, prese ntation, 
sequelae and complications of retinoblastoma 
K K H N LGT, SGT Written/ Viva voce

131 
 
 
 
 
 
MICROBIOLOGY (CODE: MI)

132 
Number COMPETENCY 
The student should be able to 
Predominant 
Domain 
K/S/A/C 
Level 
K/KH/S 
H/P 
Core 
(Y/N) 
Suggested Teaching 
Learning method 
Suggested 
Assessment 
method 
Number 
required 
to certify 
P 
MICROBIOLOGY (Topics = 11, Competencies = 74) 
Topic 1: General Microbiology, Ethics & Communication Number of  competencies: (13) Number of competencies that require certifi cation: (02) 
MI 1.1 Discuss notable historical events, scientific developments and
contributions of key scientists in the evolution of medical mic robiology.
Discuss the role of microbes in health and disease 
K K N LGT Written assessment, 
Viva Voce 
- 
MI 1.2 Describe basic morphology, physiol ogy/characteristics, classifi cation
and common infections /diseases caused by bacteria, viruses, fungi and 
parasites. 
K KH Y LGT Written assessment, 
Viva Voce 
 
MI 1.3 Describe the basic principles of molecular biology and the conc ept and
significance of studying molecular genetics. Discuss molecula r
techniques applied to disease diagnosis in clinical microbiology. 
K KH Y LGT Written assessment, 
Viva Voce 
 
MI 1.4 Describe the laboratory methods used to detect causative agents  o f
infectious diseases. 
K KH Y LGT Written assessment, 
Viva Voce 
 
MI 1.5 Discuss the appropriate method of collecting and transporting s amples
to detect microbial agents, including instructions to be given to patients 
before sample collection. 
K KH Y LGT/ SGT Written assessment, 
Viva Voce 
 
MI 1.6 Demonstrate the appropriate method of collection and transport of
samples for the detection of microbial agents including instruc tions to
be given to patients before sample collection. 
S SH Y DOAP, Role play Practical exercises 
/OSPE 
3 
MI 1.7 Discuss the attitude & behaviors t h a t  p o r t r a y  r e s p e c t  &  d e m o n s trate
respect for patient samples sent  to the laboratory for performa nce of
laboratory tests in the detection of microbial agents causing Infectious
diseases 
A SH Y SGT, Role play Observation, Viva 
Voce, Scenario based 
questions

133 
MI 1.8 Discuss and demonstrate effectiv e communication skills with pat ients,
relatives and clinicians during sample collection and pre/postt est
counseling 
C SH Y Role play OSPE, Observation, 
Scenario based 
questions 
 
MI 1.9 Discuss & demonstrate confidentiality pertaining to patient identity in 
laboratory 
results 
A SH Y SGT, Role play Scenario based 
questions, Viva Voce 
 
MI 1.10 Perform Gram stain, ZN stain, and routine stool examination to identify
the different causative agents of infectious diseases from the clinical 
specimen 
S P Y DOAP Practicals/OSPE 3 for each 
procedure 
MI 1.11 Describe the epidemiological basis of infectious diseases and t heir 
application. 
K KH Y LGT Written assessment, 
Viva Voce 
 
MI 1.12 Classify and describe the different methods of sterilization an d
disinfection. Discuss the mechan i s m  o f  a c t i o n ,  a p p l i c a t i o n  a n d  quality
control of different methods in the laboratory and in clinical and surgical
practices. 
K KH Y LGT 
SGT 
Written assessment, 
Case discussion 
exercise, Case based 
MCQ, Viva Voce 
 
MI 1.13 Choose the most appropriate method of sterilization and disinfection to 
be used in specific situations in the laboratory, in clinical a nd surgical
practice. 
K KH Y SGT, Case discussion Written 
assessment/Viva 
voce/ 
 
Topic 2 : Basic Immunology & Immu nological disorders Number of competencies: (08) Number of competencies that require certific ation: (NIL) 
MI 2.1 Explain the role of immunological mechanisms in health and dise ase 
(innate and acquired immunity). 
K KH Y LGT Written assessment, 
Case based MCQ, 
Viva Voce 
 
MI 2.2 D e s c r i b e  t h e  s t r u c t u r e  a n d  f u n c t i o n s  o f  i m m u n e  s y s t e m  a n d  i t s  
components (antigens, antibodies and complement systems). 
K KH Y LGT 
SGT 
Written assessment, 
Case based MCQ, 
Viva Voce 
 
MI 2.3 Describe the host immune responses in Microbial infections (humoral 
and cellular immune response). 
K KH Y LGT 
SGT 
Written assessment, 
Case based MCQ, 
Viva Voce 
 
MI 2.4 Explain the immune response in different types of infections (bacterial, 
mycobacterial, viral, fungal and parasitic infections) 
K KH Y LGT 
SGT 
Written assessment, 
Case based MCQ, 
Viva Voce

134 
MI 2.5 D i s c u s s  t h e  p r i n c i p l e s  a n d  a p p l i c a t i o n s  o f  l a b o r a t o r y  t e s t s  u s ed in 
diagnostic microbiology based on the host's immune response. 
K KH Y LGT 
SGT 
Written assessment, 
Case based MCQ, 
Viva Voce 
 
MI 2.6 Discuss the immunological basis of disease prevention through active 
and passive immune prophylaxis. Discuss the importance of herd
immunity in prevention and control of infectious disease in community.
K KH Y LGT 
SGT 
Written assessment, 
Case based MCQ, 
Viva Voce 
 
MI 2.7 Describe the immunological mechan isms in immunological disorder s
(hypersensitivity, autoimmune disorders and immunodeficiency states) 
and discuss the laboratory methods used in their detection. 
K KH Y LGT 
SGT 
Written assessment, 
Case based MCQ, 
Viva Voce 
 
MI 2.8 Describe the immunological mechanisms involved in transplantati on,
tumour immunity and their applications in disease management. 
K KH N LGT, SDL` MCQ, Viva Voce  
Topic 3: CVS and Blood Number of competencies: (13) Number of c ompetencies that require certification: (1) 
MI 3.1 Describe the etiopathogenesis, clinical features, complications/sequelae 
and laboratory diagnosis of rheumatic fever. 
K KH Y LGT SGT, Case-based 
discussion 
Written/ Viva voce  
MI3.2 Describe  the  classification  etio-pathogenesis,  clinical  features  of
Infective endocarditis (IE). 
K KH Y LGT, SGT, Case based 
discussion 
Written/ Viva voce  
MI 3.3 Discuss the diagnostic modalities of IE available with special emphasis 
on concept of sepsis and blood culture collection & processing. 
K KH Y LGT, SGT , Case based 
discussion 
Written/ Viva voce 2 
MI 3.4 Diagnose a clinically suspected case of rheumatic fever/IE based on the 
findings of various microscopic, serological and culture invest igations. 
K KH Y LGT, SGT, Case based 
discussion 
Case based exercise, 
Case based MCQ, 
Viva voce 
 
MI 3.5 Define & describe types of Pyrexia of unknown origin (PUO). Discuss the 
etiopathogenesis and diagnostic modalities available to rule out
infective causes of PUO. 
K KH Y LGT, SDL, SGT , Case-based 
discussion 
Written assessment/ 
Viva voce 
 
MI 3.6 Classify & describe the enteric fever pathogens. Discuss the evolution of
the clinical course, pathogenesis, complications, laboratory di agnosis
and prevention of enteric fever. 
K KH Y LGT. SGT, Case-based 
discussion 
Case based exercise, 
Written assessment, 
Case based MCQ, 
Viva voce

135 
MI 3.7 Choose the most appropriate labor atory test in a suspected case  o f
enteric fever based on the duration of illness and in a suspect ed case of
carrier. 
K KH Y Interpretational exercises 
(Practicals) 
Case based exercise, 
Case based MCQ, 
interpretational 
exercise, Viva Voce 
 
MI 3.8 Read and interpret the results of  various laboratory investigat ions in a
suspected case of enteric fever with special emphasis on serological test
results. 
K KH Y Interpretational exercises 
(Practicals) 
Case discussion 
exercise, Case based 
MCQ, interpretation 
exercise, Viva Voce 
 
MI 3.9 Enumerate the common infective causes of anaemia and describe the 
mechanisms involved in causing anaemia by them. 
K KH Y LGT Written assessment  
MI 3.10 Describe the morphology, life cycle, pathogenesis, labo ratory diagnosis, 
prevention and control of the common parasites causing anaemia. 
K KH Y LGT Written assessment, 
Case based exercise, 
Case based MCQ, 
Viva Voce 
 
MI 3.11 Describe the morphology, life cycle, pathogenesis, clinical pre sentation,
laboratory diagnosis and prevention of hemoparasites commonl y
prevalent in India (e.g. causing kala-azar, malaria, filariasis e t c . )  
K KH Y LGT, SGT, SDL Written assessment, 
Case discussion 
exercise, Case based 
MCQ, Viva Voce 
 
MI 3.12 Differentiate agents of malignant malaria from agents of benign malaria
reported in peripheral blood smear examination/ serology and ex plain
its clinical significance. 
K, KH Y Case-based discussion with 
reports (Practicals) 
Interpretational 
exercise, Case based 
exercise, Case based 
MCQ, Viva Voce 
 
MI 3.13 Describe the epidemiology, the etio- pathogenesis, evol ution
complications, opportunistic inf ections, diagnosis, prevention and the 
principles of management of HIV 
K KH Y LGT, SDL Written assessment, 
Case based MCQ, 
Viva Voce 
 
Topic 4: Gastrointestinal and Hepatobiliary system Number of co mpetencies:(09) Number of competencies that require certificati on:(01) 
MI 4.1 Define and differentiate between diarrhea, dysentery and food 
poisoning. Enumerate the microbial agents causing them. 
K KH Y LGT Written assessment, 
Case based MCQ, 
Viva Voce

136 
MI 4.2 Describe the epidemiology, morphology, pathogenesis, clinical features 
and diagnostic modalities of bacterial, viral, parasitic and fu ngal agents
causing diarrhoea. 
K KH Y LGT Written assessment, 
Case based MCQ, 
Viva Voce 
 
MI 4.3 Describe the epidemiology, morphology, pathogenesis, clinical f eatures
and diagnostic modalities of bac terial, viral, parasitic and fu ngal agents
causing dysentery 
K KH Y LGT with case discussions Written assessment, 
Case based MCQ, 
Viva Voce 
 
MI 4.4 Identify the common etiologic agents of diarrhoea and dysentery  b y  
stool microscopic examination. 
S SH Y DOAP (Practicals) Interpretational 
exercises /practical 
exercise 
3 
MI 4.5 Enumerate the bacterial, viral, parasitic and fungal agents of food 
poisoning and discuss their pathogenesis, clinical course and laboratory
diagnosis. 
K KH Y LGT with case discussion , 
SGT 
Written assessment, 
Case based MCQ, 
Viva Voce 
 
MI 4.6 Describe the infective aetiology, pathogenesis and clinical course of Acid 
peptic  disease  (APD)  and Discuss  the  laboratory  diagnosis and
management of the causative agent of APD. 
K KH Y LGT with case discussion, SDL Written assessment, 
Case based MCQ, 
Viva Voce 
 
MI 4.7 Describe the epidemiology, etiopathogenesis, clinical features and 
complications of viral hepatitis. 
K KH Y LGT with case / clinical report 
discussion 
Written assessment, 
Case based MCQ, 
Viva Voce 
 
MI 4.8 Discuss the modalities in laboratory diagnosis, with special emphasis on 
viral markers and preventive strategies for viral hepatitis cau sed by
hepatitis viruses. 
K KH Y LGT with case / clinical report 
discussion 
Written assessment, 
Case based MCQ, 
Viva Voce 
 
MI 4.9 Suggest the most appropriate laboratory test based on history a nd
clinical presentation in a suspected case of viral hepatitis an d interpret
the type and progress of viral hepatitis based on the laboratory report 
of viral markers in a case of infection by hepatitis virus. 
K KH Y SDL, SGT with case / clinical 
report discussion 
Written assessment, 
Case based MCQ, 
Viva Voce 
 
Topic 5: Musculoskeletal system, Skin and Soft tissue infections Number of competencies: (05) Number of competencies that requ ire certification: (NIL) 
MI 5.1 Enumerate the microbial agents causing anaerobic infections. Describe 
the pathogenesis,  clinical course and the laboratory  diagnosis of
anaerobic infections. 
K KH Y LGT with case discussion Written assessment, 
Case based MCQ, 
Viva Voce 
 
MI 5.2 Explain the etiopathogenesis, clinical course & laboratory diagnosis of 
bone & joint infections caused by bacterial, fungal, viral and parasitic
agents. 
K KH Y LGT with case discussion Written assessment, 
Case based MCQ, 
Viva Voce

137 
MI 5.3 Explain the etiopathogenesis, clinical course and the laborator y 
diagnosis of skin and soft tissue infections caused by bacteria l, fungal,
viral and parasitic agents. 
K KH Y LGT with case discussion 
SGT 
Written assessment, 
Case based MCQ, 
Viva Voce 
 
MI 5.4 Differentiate between infective and non-infective lesion s in the skin. 
Enlist microbes causing systemic disease with involvement of skin. 
K KH N LGT Written assessment, 
Viva voce 
 
MI 5.5 Describe the etiopathogenesis, clinical course, complications a nd 
laboratory diagnosis of mycobacterial infections involving skin  &  s o f t
tissue with special emphasis on sample collection from/of skin 
K KH Y LGT, SGT, SDL Written assessment  
Topic 6 : Central Nervous System infections Number of competenc ies: (03) Number of competencies that require certification: (N IL) 
MI 6.1 Enumerate the microbial agents causing meningitis. Explain the 
pathogenesis, clinical course a nd laboratory diagnosis of menin gitis
caused by bacterial, fungal, viral and parasitic agents. 
K KH Y LGT with case discussion 
SGT 
Written assessment, 
Case based MCQ, 
Viva Voce 
 
MI 6.2 Enumerate the microbial agents causing encephalitis Explain the 
pathogenesis, clinical course and laboratory diagnosis of encep halitis
caused by bacterial, fungal, viral and parasitic agents. 
K KH Y LGT with case discussion 
SGT, SDL 
Written assessment, 
Case based MCQ, 
Viva Voce 
 
MI 6.3 Identify the microbial agents causing meningitis from a Gram st ained
given smear. Read & Interpret the microscopic findings and cult ure
report of CSF to diagnose a case of bacterial, viral, fungal or  parasitic
infection in CNS 
K KH Y SGT Written assessment, 
Case based MCQ, 
Viva Voce, OSCE 
 
Topic 7: Respiratory tract infections Number of competencies: ( 05) Number of competencies/ skills that require certification: (02) 
MI 7.1 Explain the etiopathogenesis, laboratory diagnosis and p revention of
Infections of the upper respiratory tract caused by bacterial, viral, fungal 
and parasitic agents. 
K KH Y LGT with case discussion 
SGT 
Written assessment, 
Case based MCQ, 
Viva Voce 
 
MI 7.2 Explain the etiopathogenesis, laboratory diagnosis and p revention of
Infections of the lower respiratory tract caused by bacterial, 
mycobacterial, viral, fungal and parasitic agents. 
K KH Y LGT with case discussion 
SGT 
Written assessment, 
Case based MCQ, 
Viva Voce 
 
MI 7.3 Enlist & identify the etiological agents of lower respir atory infection in
specific situations like age, immune status, community-acquired  
pneumonia, hospital-acquired pneumonia etc 
K KH Y LGT with case discussion , 
SGT 
Written assessment, 
Case based MCQ, 
Viva Voce 
 
MI 7.4 Identify  the common etiologic agents of upper respiratory tract
infections in a Gram Stain/ Albert stained smear of throat swab  and 
correlate with the clinical findings provided. 
S P Y DOAP Practicals OSPE, Clinical case 
based exercises 
3

138 
MI 7.5 Identify the common etiologic agents of lower respiratory trac t
infections in a provided Gram Stained & Acid fast stained smear  o f
sputum/BAL/tracheal aspirate and correlate with the clinical fi ndings
provided 
S P Y DOAP Practicals OSPE, Clinical case 
based exercises 
3 
Topic:8 Genitourinary and Sexually Transmitted Infections Numbe r of competencies: (04) Number of competencies that require cer tification: (NIL) 
MI 8.1 Describe the etiopathogen esis and discuss the laboratory  diagnosis of
common bacterial, viral, fungal and parasitic infections of the  genito- 
urinary system 
K KH Y LGT/ SGT Written assessment, 
Viva voce 
- 
MI 8.2 Enlist common sexually transmitted infections (STI). Explain th e
pathogenesis, laboratory diagnosis and prevention of common bacterial
and viral sexually transmitted infections. 
K KH Y LGT/ SGT Written assessment, 
Viva Voce 
 
MI 8. Explain the concept and ut ility of Syndromic management of STI. K KH Y SDL/ SGT Written assessment, 
Viva voce 
 
MI 8.4 Explain etiopathogenesis, clinical course, and the appropriate method 
for specimen collection, and discuss the laboratory diagnosis of different
clinical and epidemiological types of urinary tract infections. 
K KH Y LGT/ SGT Written assessment, 
Viva voce 
 
Topic 9: Zoonotic diseases and Miscellaneous Number of competen cies: (06) Number of competencies that require certification: ( NIL) 
MI 9.1 D e f i n e  a n d  c l a s s i f y  Z o o n o t i c  i n f e ctions. Explain etio-pathogene sis,
vectors, clinical course, transmission, risk factors, laborator y diagnosis,
a n d  p r e v e n t i v e  &  c o n t r o l  s t r a t e g i e s  o f  d i f f e r e n t  z o o n o t i c  i n f e ctions
caused by bacterial, viral, fungal and parasitic agents. 
K KH Y LGT/ SGT Written assessment, 
Viva voce 
 
MI 9.2 Describe the etiopathogenesis and laboratory diagnosis of opportunistic 
infections(OI) along with factors predisposing to the development of OI
by bacterial, viral, fungal and parasitic agents. 
K KH Y LGT, SGT Written assessment, 
Viva voce 
 
MI 9.3 Choose the most suitable microbiological investigation in a given clinical 
situation and Interpret the resu lts of the laboratory tests for  t h e
diagnosis of the infectious disease 
K SH Y Case based exercise, SGT Cased based 
exercises, Case based 
MCQ 
 
MI 9.4 Describe the etiopathogenesis of infective causes of malignancy and 
explain the mechanisms used by oncogenic viruses in the development
of virus-associated malignancies, along with their preventive measures.
K KH Y LGT SGT Written assessment, 
Viva voce

139 
MI 9.5 Describe the concept of emerging & re-emerging Infectious diseases. 
Explain the factors responsible for emergence and re-emergence of
these disease and strategies for their prevention and control. 
K KH Y LGT, small group discussion, 
SDL 
Written assessment, 
Viva voce 
 
MI 9.6 Describe the National Health Pro grams in the prevention of common 
infectious diseases and discuss the National reference centres for
disease diagnosis and control 
K K N LGT Written assessment, 
Viva voce 
 
Topic 10: Healthcare-associated infections (HAI) Number of comp etencies: (05) Number of competencies that require certificatio n: (01) 
 
MI 10.1 
Enumerate different causative agents and the types of Healthcar e-
Associated Infections (HAI). Define HAI and describe the chain of
transmission and its role in preventing HAI. 
K K Y LGTs, SGT Written assessment, 
Viva voce 
 
MI 10.2 Describe the standard & transmission based precautions for infection
control and the role of the hospital infection control committee (HICC) 
in the prevention of HAI. 
K KH Y LGTs, SGT MCQ, viva voce  
MI 10.3 Demonstrate hand washing, donning- doffing of PPE and segregation of 
Biomedical waste 
S SH Y DOAP, Role-play, SGT, 
Practicals 
OSPE, Direct 
Observation with 
checklist 
3 each 
MI 10.4 Describe the methods used and significance of assessing the microbial 
contamination of food, water and air (in hospital surveillance)  
K KH N Interactive LGTs Written assessment, 
MCQ, Viva Voce 
 
 
MI 10.5 
Describe the commonly detected drug-resistant microbes in HAI. Explain 
the mechanism of evolution, spre ad, and control of antimicrobia l drug
resistance in hospitalized patients. 
K KH Y LGT, SGT Written assessment, 
MCQ, Viva Voce 
 
Topic 11: Antimicrobial resistance (AMR) & Antimicrobial Stewardship (AMSP) Number of competencies: (03) Number of competencies that  require certification: (Nil) 
MI 11.1 Describe the genotypic & phenotypic mechanisms of antimicrobial  drug
resistance and the methods of antimicrobial susceptibility testing, along
with interpretation of the antimicrobial susceptibility testing  r e p o r t  
K KH Y LGT, SGT Written assessment, 
MCQ, Viva Voce, 
Interpretational 
exercise 
- 
MI 11.2 Explain intrinsic & acquired drug resistance along with the antimicrobial 
spectrum of important human pathogens and its application in cl inical
therapy. 
K KH Y LGT, SGT Written assessment, 
MCQ, Viva Voce 
- 
MI 11.3 Explain the concept and application of the antimicrobial stewardship 
program including rational antimicrobial prescription and your role in its
implementation. 
K KH Y LGT, SGT Written assessment, 
MCQ, Viva Voce 
-

140 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
FORENSIC MEDICINE & TOXICOLOGY (CODE: FM)

141 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Number COMPETENCY 
The student should be able to 
Predominant 
Domain 
K/S/A/C 
Level 
K/KH/S 
H/P 
Core 
(Y/N) 
Suggested Teaching 
Learning method 
Suggested 
Assessment 
method 
Number 
required 
to certify 
P 
FORENSIC MEDICINE & TOXICOLOGY (Topics = 14, Competencies = 158) 
Topic 1: Introduction to forensic medicine basics of legal procedure. Number of competencies: (09) Number of competencies that  require certification: (NIL) 
FM1.1 Define Forensic medicine, Clinical Forensic Medicine, Forensic 
Pathology, State Medicine, Legal Medicine and Medical
Jurisprudence 
K KH Y LGT, SGT/ Practicals / 
Seminars 
Written/ Viva voce  
FM1.2 Describe history of Forensic Medicine K KH N SDL Written/ Viva voce  
FM1.3 Describe legal competencies including Bharatiya Nagarika Suraks ha 
Sanhita (BNSS), Bharatiya Nyay Sanhita (BNS) Bharatiya Sakshya 
Adhiniyam (BSA) , Protection of Children fr om  S ex u al O ffe nc e s Act  
(POCSO) Civil and Criminal Cases, Inquest (Police Inquest and 
Magistrate’s Inquest), Cognizable and Non-cognizable offences 
K KH Y LGT, SGT/ Practicals / 
Seminars 
Written/ Viva voce  
FM1.4 Describe Courts in India and their powers: Supreme Court, High
Court, Sessions court, Magistrate’s Court, Labour Court, Famil y
Court, Executive Magistrate Court and Juvenile Justice Board 
K KH N SDL/Moot Court Written/ Viva voce  
FM1.5 Describe Court competencies including issue of Summons, conduct
money, types of witnesses, recording of evidence oath, affirmat ion,
examination in chief, cross exam ination, re-examination and cou rt 
questions, recording of evidence & conduct of doctor in witness box
K KH Y LGT, SGT/ Practicals / 
Seminars, Moot Court 
Written/ Viva voce

142  
Number COMPETENCY 
The student should be able to 
Predominant 
Domain 
K/S/A/C 
Level 
K/KH/S 
H/P 
Core 
(Y/N) 
Suggested Teaching 
Learning method 
Suggested 
Assessment 
method 
Number 
required 
to certify 
P 
FM1.6 Describe Offenses in Court including Perjury; Court strictures vis-a- 
vis Medical Officer 
K KH N SDL Written/ Viva voce  
FM1.7 Describe Dying Declaration & Dying Deposition K KH Y LGT, SGT/ Practicals / 
Seminars 
Written/ Viva voce  
FM1.8 Describe the latest decisions/notifications/resolutions /
circulars/standing orders related to medico-legal practice issu ed by
Courts/Government authorities etc. 
K KH Y LGT, SGT/ Practicals / 
Seminars 
Written/ Viva voce  
FM1.9 Describe the importance of documentation in medical practice in
r e g a r d  t o  m e d i c o  l e g a l  e x a m i n a t i o n s ,  M e d i c a l  C e r t i f i c a t e s  a n d
medico legal reports especially 
- maintenance of patient case records, discharge 
summary, prescribed registers to be maintained in 
Health Centres. 
- maintenance of medico-legal register like accident register. 
- documents of issuance of wound certificate 
- documents of issuance of drunkenness certificate. 
- documents of issuance of sickness and fitness certificate. 
- documents for issuance of death certificate. -documents of 
Medical Certification of Cause of Death - Form Number4 and 
4A 
- documents for estimation of age by physical, dental 
and radiological examination and issuance of 
certificate 
K KH Y LGT, SGT/ Practicals / 
Seminars 
Written/ Viva 
voce/Direct 
observation 
 
Topic 2: Forensic Pathology Number of competencies: (28) Number  of competencies that require certification : (1) 
FM2.1 Select appropriate cause of death in a particular scenario by referring 
ICD 11 code 
K KH Y LGT,SGT/ Practicals / 
Seminars 
Written/ Viva voce  
FM2.2 Write a correct Medical Certifi cate of Cause of Death (MCCD) 
certificate as per ICD 11 document 
S SH Y LGT, SGT/ Practicals / 
Seminars 
Written/ Viva voce/ 
Direct observation /O 
SPE 
3

143  
Number COMPETENCY 
The student should be able to 
Predominant 
Domain 
K/S/A/C 
Level 
K/KH/S 
H/P 
Core 
(Y/N) 
Suggested Teaching 
Learning method 
Suggested 
Assessment 
method 
Number 
required 
to certify 
P 
FM2.3 Define, describe and discuss death and its types includin g
somatic/clinical/cellular, molec ular and brain-death, Cortical Death
and Brainstem Death 
K KH Y LGT, SGT/ Practicals / 
Seminars 
Written/ Viva voce  
FM2.4 D e s c r i b e  s a l i e n t  f e a t u r e s  o f  t h e  O r g a n T r a n s p l a n t a t i o n a n d  T h e  
Human Organ Transplant (Amendment) Act 2011 and discuss ethical
issues regarding organ donation 
K KH Y LGT, SGT/ Practicals / 
Seminars/video demo. 
Written/ Viva voce  
FM2.5 Describe and discuss issues related to sudden natural deaths K KH Y LGT, SGT/ Practicals / 
Seminars 
Written/ Viva voce  
FM2.6 Describe and discuss natural and unnatural deaths K KH Y LGT, SGT/ Practicals / 
Seminars 
Written/ Viva voce  
FM2.7 Discuss moment of death, modes of death – coma, asphyxia and 
syncope 
K KH Y LGT, SGT/ Practicals / 
Seminars/ Video demo. 
Written/ Viva voce  
FM2.8 Describe and discuss suspended animation K KH Y LGT, SGT/ Practicals / 
Seminars 
Written/ Viva voce  
FM2.9 Describe and discuss post-mortem changes including signs of death,
cooling of body, post-mortem lividity, rigor mortis, cadaveric spasm, 
cold stiffening and heat stiffening 
K KH Y LGT,  SGT/  Practicals  / 
Seminars, Autopsy, 
DOAP/Video Demo. 
Written/ Viva 
voce/OSPE 
 
FM2.10 Describe putrefaction, mummification, adipocere and maceration K KH Y LGT, SGT/ Practicals / 
Seminars, Autopsy, DOAP 
Written/ Viva 
voce/OSPE 
 
FM2.11 Discuss estimation of time since death K KH Y LGT, SGT/ Practicals / 
Seminars, Autopsy, DOAP 
Written/ Viva 
voce/OSPE 
 
FM2:12 Introduction to mortuary setup and minimum requirement for 
conducting post-mortem examination and Embalming techniques 
K KH Y LGT, SGT/ Practicals / 
Seminars 
Written/ Viva 
voce 
 
FM2.13 Describe and discuss autopsy competencies including post-mortem 
examination, different types of autopsies, aims and objectives of
post-mortem examination 
K KH Y LGT, SGT/ Practicals / 
Seminars, Autopsy, DOAP 
Written/ Viva 
voce/OSPE 
 
FM2.14 Describe the legal requirements to conduct post-mortem 
examination and competencies to conduct medico-legal post- 
K KH Y LGT, SGT/ Practicals / 
Seminars, Autopsy, DOAP 
Written/ Viva 
voce/OSPE

144  
Number COMPETENCY 
The student should be able to 
Predominant 
Domain 
K/S/A/C 
Level 
K/KH/S 
H/P 
Core 
(Y/N) 
Suggested Teaching 
Learning method 
Suggested 
Assessment 
method 
Number 
required 
to certify 
P 
 mortem examination       
FM2.15 Describe and discuss obscure autopsy and Virtopsy K KH Y LGT, SGT/ Practicals / 
Seminars, Video Demo. 
Written/ Viva voce  
FM2.16 Describe and discuss examination of clothing, preservation of viscera 
on post-mortem 
examination for chemical analysis and other  medico-legal
purposes, post-mortem artefacts 
K KH Y LGT, SGT/
Practicals / Seminars , 
Autopsy, DOAP, Video Demo.
Written/ Viva 
voce/OSPE 
 
FM2.17 Describe the clinical features, post-mortem finding and medico legal 
aspects of injuries due to physical agents like heat (heat-hype r-
pyrexia, heat stroke, sun stroke, heat exhaustion/prostration, heat
cramps [miner’s cramp] or cold (systemic and localized hypothermia,
frostbite, trench foot, immersion foot) 
K KH Y LGT, SGT/ Practicals / 
Seminars, Autopsy ,DOAP 
Written/ Viva 
voce 
 
FM2.18 Describe types of injuries, clinical features, patho-physiology , post-
mortem findings and medico-legal aspects in cases of burns, sca lds, 
lightening, electrocution and radiations 
K KH Y LGT, SGT/ Practicals / 
Seminars, Autopsy, DOAP 
Written/ Viva 
voce/OSPE 
 
FM2.19 D e s c r i b e  a n d  d i s c u s s  c l i n i c a l  f e a t u r e s ,  p o s t - m o r t e m  f i n d i n g s  
and medico-legal aspects of death due to starvation and neglect 
K KH Y LGT, SGT/ Practicals / 
Seminars 
Written/ Viva 
voce 
 
FM 2.20 Describe special protocols for conduction of medico-legal autop sies 
in cases of death in custody or following violation of human rights as 
per National Human Rights Commission Guidelines 
K KH Y LGT, SGT/ Practicals / 
Seminars, Autopsy, DOAP 
Written/ Viva 
voce/OSPE 
 
FM2.21 Describe and discuss examination of mutilated bodies or fragments, 
charred bones and bundle of bones 
K KH Y LGT, SGT/ Practicals / 
Seminars, DOAP 
Written/ Viva 
voce/OSPE 
 
FM2.22 Describe and discuss exhumation K KH Y LGT, SGT/ Practicals / 
Seminars 
Written/ Viva voce  
FM2.23 Crime Scene Investigation: 
Describe and discuss the objectives of crime scene visit, the duties &
responsibilities of doctors on crime scene and the reconstructi on of
sequence of events after crime scene investigation 
K KH N SDL Written/ Viva voce

145  
Number COMPETENCY 
The student should be able to 
Predominant 
Domain 
K/S/A/C 
Level 
K/KH/S 
H/P 
Core 
(Y/N) 
Suggested Teaching 
Learning method 
Suggested 
Assessment 
method 
Number 
required 
to certify 
P 
FM2.24 Investigation of anaesthetic, operative deaths:
Describe and discuss special protocols for conduction of autopsy and 
for collection, preservation  and dispatch of related material
evidences 
K KH N SD L Written/ Viva voce  
FM2.25 Demonstrate professionalism while conducting autopsy in medic o
legal situations, interpretation of findings and makin g
inference/opinion, collection preservation and dispatch of biological
or trace evidences 
A, C KH/SH Y LGT, SGT/ Practicals / 
Seminars, DOAP 
Written/ Viva voce/ 
OSPE 
 
FM2.26 Demonstrate ability to work in a team for conduction of medico-legal
autopsies in cases of death following alleged negligence medica l
dowry death, death in custody or following violation of human rights
as per National Human Rights Commission Guidelines on exhumation
AK H Y LGT, SGT/ Practicals / 
Seminars, DOAP 
Written/ Viva voce/ 
OSPE 
 
FM2.27 Demonstrate ability to exchange information by verbal, or nonverbal
communication to the peers, family members, law enforcing agenc y
and judiciary 
A and C KH Y LGT, SGT/ Practicals / 
Seminars, DOAP 
Written/ Viva voce  
FM2.28 Demonstrate ability to use local resources whenever required like 
in mass disaster situations 
A and C KH Y LGT, SGT/ Practicals 
/Seminars 
Written/ Viva voce  
Topic 3: Mechanical asphyxia Number of competencies: (04) Numbe r of competencies that require certification : (NIL) 
FM3.1 Define, classify and describe asphyxia and medico-legal 
interpretation of post-mortem findings in asphyxial deaths 
K KH Y LGT, SGT/ Practicals / 
Seminars, Autopsy, DOAP 
Written/ Viva 
voce/OSPE 
 
FM3.2 Describe and discuss different types of hanging and strangulati on 
including clinical findings, causes of death, post-mortem findings and 
medico-legal aspects of death due to hanging and strangulation 
including  examination,  preservation  and  dispatch  of  ligat ure
material 
K KH Y LGT, SGT/ Practicals / 
Seminars, Autopsy DOAP 
Written/ Viva 
voce/OSPE 
 
FM3.3 Describe and discuss patho-physiology, clinical features, post -
mortem findings and medico-legal aspects of traumatic asphyxia ,
obstruction of nose & mouth, suffocation and sexual asphyxia 
K KH Y LGT, SGT/ Practicals / 
Seminars, Autopsy, DOAP 
Written/ Viva 
voce/OSPE

146  
Number COMPETENCY 
The student should be able to 
Predominant 
Domain 
K/S/A/C 
Level 
K/KH/S 
H/P 
Core 
(Y/N) 
Suggested Teaching 
Learning method 
Suggested 
Assessment 
method 
Number 
required 
to certify 
P 
FM3.4 Describe and discuss types, patho -physiology, clinical features , 
postmortem findings and medico-legal aspects of drowning 
K KH Y LGT, SGT/ Practicals / 
Seminars, Autopsy, DOAP 
Written/ Viva 
voce/OSPE 
 
 Topic 4: Clinical forensic medicine – identification Number of competencies: (05) Number of competencies that require certific ation : (NIL) 
FM4.1 Define and describe Corpus Delicti, establishment of identity o f  
living persons including race, sex, religion, complexion, statu re. 
K KH Y L G T ,  S G T /  P r a c t i c a l s  /  
S e m i n a r s  ,  B e d s i d e  c l i n i c ,  
DOAP 
Written/Viva 
voce/ skill 
assessment 
 
FM4.2 Discuss teeth-eruption, decay, bite marks, and medico-legal 
aspects of teeth. 
K KH Y L G T ,  S G T /  P r a c t i c a l s  /  
S e m i n a r s  ,  B e d s i d e  c l i n i c ,  
DOAP 
Written/Viva 
voce/ skill 
assessment 
 
FM4.3 Discuss age determination using morphology, bones- ossification 
centers and medico-legal aspects of age. 
KK H Y L G T ,  S G T /  P r a c t i c a l s  /  
S e m i n a r s  ,  B e d s i d e  c l i n i c ,  
DOAP 
Written/Viva 
voce/ skill 
assessment 
 
FM 4.4 Describe and discuss identificati on of criminals, unknown perso ns, 
dead bodies from the remains-hairs, fibers, teeth, anthropometry 
K KH Y L G T ,  S G T /  P r a c t i c a l s  /  
S e m i n a r s  ,  B e d s i d e  c l i n i c ,  
DOAP 
Written/Viva 
voce/ skill 
assessment 
 
FM4.5 Dactylography, footprints, scars, tattoos, poroscopy and
superimposition 
K KH Y LGT, SGT/ Practicals / 
Seminars 
Written/ Viva 
voce 
 
 Topic 5: Clinical forensic medicine - mechanical injuries and wounds Number of competencies: (06) Number of competencies that require certification : (NIL) 
FM5.1 Define, describe and classify different types of mechanical inj uries, 
abrasion, bruise, laceration, stab wound, incised wound, chop 
wound, defense wound, self- inflicted/fabricated wounds and their
medico-legal aspects 
K KH Y LGT, SGT/ Practicals / 
Seminars, Bed side clinic, 
DOAP 
Written/ Viva 
voce/OSCE 
 
FM5.2 Define injury, assault & hurt. Describe Bharatiya Nyay Sanhita (BNS) 
pertaining to injuries 
K KH Y LGT, SGT/ Practicals / 
Seminars 
Written/ Viva voce

147  
FM5.3 Describe accidental, suicidal and homicidal injuries. Describe 
simple, grievous and dangerous injuries. Describe ante-mortem and
post-mortem injuries 
K K/KH Y LGT, SGT/ Practicals / 
Seminars 
Written/ Viva voce  
FM5.4 Describe healing of injury and fracture of bones with its medico-legal 
importance 
K K/KH Y LGT, SGT/ Practicals / 
Seminars 
Written/ Viva voce  
Number COMPETENCY 
The student should be able to 
Predominant 
Domain 
K/S/A/C 
Level 
K/KH/S 
H/P 
Core 
(Y/N) 
Suggested Teaching 
Learning method 
Suggested 
Assessment 
method 
Number 
required 
to certify 
P 
FM5.5 Describe factors influencing infliction of injuries and healing , 
examination and  certification of wounds and wound as a cause of
death: Primary and Secondary 
K K/KH Y LGT, SGT/ Practicals / 
Seminars 
Written/ Viva voce  
FM5.6 Describe and discuss different  t y p e s  o f  w e a p o n s  i n c l u d i n g  
dangerous weapons and their examination 
K K/KH Y LGT, SGT/ Practicals / 
Seminars 
Written/ Viva voce  
Topic 6: Clinical forensic medicine - firearm injuries Number o f competencies: (02) Number of competencies that require certif ication : (NIL) 
FM6.1 Describe different types of firearms including structure and 
components. Along with description of ammunition propellant 
charge and mechanism of fire-arms, different types of cartridge s 
and bullets and various terminology in relation of firearm – ca liber,
range, choking 
K K/KH Y LGT, SGT/ Practicals / 
Seminars 
Written/ Viva voce  
FM6.2 Describe and discuss wound ballistics-different types of firear m 
injuries, blast injuries and their interpretation, preservation  a n d  
dispatch of trace evidences in cases of firearm and blast injur ies,
various tests related to confirmation of use of firearms 
K K/KH Y L G T ,  S G T /  P r a c t i c a l s  /  
Seminars, Bed side clinic, 
DOAP 
Written/Viva 
voce/OSCE 
 
Topic 7: Clinical forensic medicine - regional injuries Number of competencies: (02) Number of competencies that require certi fication : (NIL) 
FM7.1 Describeanddiscuss regional injuries to head(Scalpwounds, fract ure 
skull, intracranial hemorrhages, coup and countercoup injuries) , 
neck, chest, abdomen, limbs, genital  organs, spinal  cord and
Skeleton 
K K/KH Y LGT, SGT/ Practicals / 
Seminars, Bed side clinic or 
autopsy, DOAP 
Written/ Viva 
voce/ 
OSCE/OSPE

148  
FM7.2 Describe and discuss injuries related to fall from height and vehicular 
injuries – Primary and Secondary impact, Secondary injuries, cr ush 
syndrome, railway spine 
K K/KH Y LGT, SGT/ Practicals / 
Seminars, Bed side clinic or 
autopsy, DOAP 
Written/ Viva 
voce/ 
OSCE/OSPE 
 
Topic 8: Clinical forensic medicine - sexual offences Number o f competencies: (16) Number o f competencies that require certification : (NIL) 
Number COMPETENCY 
The student should be able to 
Predominant 
Domain 
K/S/A/C 
Level 
K/KH/S 
H/P 
Core 
(Y/N) 
Suggested Teaching 
Learning method 
Suggested 
Assessment 
method 
Number 
required 
to certify 
P 
FM8.1 Describe various sections of BNS and BNSS related to definition  of 
rape, medical examination of rap e victim/ survivor and accused of 
rape, police information by the doctors and medical care with recent
amendments notified till date (i.e. Sections 63 BNS, 200 BNS, 3 97 
BNSS & 184 BNSS, 52 BNSS), and re cent amendments  notified till
d a t e ,  s e c t i o n s  3  t o  1 2 ,  2 7  a n d  4 1  o f  P r o t e c t i o n  o f  C h i l d r e n  f r om
sexual offences (POCSO) Act. 
K K/KH Y LGT, SGT/ Practicals / 
Seminars, Video Demo. 
Written/ Viva 
voce/ 
OSCE/OSPE 
 
FM8.2 Describe and discuss the examination of the survivor of an alle ged
case of rape, and the preparation of report, framing the opinion and
preservation and dispatch of trace evidences in such cases 
K K/KH Y L G T ,  S G T /  P r a c t i c a l s  /  
Seminars, Bed side clinic, 
DOAP, Video Demo. 
Written/ Viva 
voce/OSCE 
 
FM8.3 Describe and discuss informed consent in sexual intercourse. 
Describe and discuss histories of gender and sexuality-based 
(sexual orientation) identities and rights in India. Describe history 
of decriminalization of ‘adultery’ and consensual adult 
homosexual sexual behaviour. Describe sexual offences with its 
medicolegal significance- 
 Forced/ non-consensual penetrative anal sex 
 Forced/ non-consensual oral sex 
 Sexual acts with animals/ bestiality/ zoophilia 
 Forced/ non-consensual insertion of fingers or objects 
Forced/ non-consensual touching or groping or disrobing (‘indec ent
assault’). 
K K/KH Y LGT, SGT/ Practicals / 
Seminars 
Written/ Viva voce

149  
FM 8.4 Define and discuss infanticide, foeticide and stillbirth K KH Y  LGT, SGT/ Practicals / 
Seminars 
Written/ Viva voce  
FM8.5 Define and discuss signs of intrauterine death, signs of live birth, 
viability of foetus, age determination of foetus, DOAP of ossification 
centres, Hydrostatic test, Sudden infant death syndrome and 
Munchausen’s syndrome by proxy. 
K KH Y LGT, SGT/ Practicals / 
Seminars 
Written/ Viva voce  
FM8.6 Describe the difference between paraphilia and paraphilic disorder. 
Describe paraphilic disorder as per the latest guidelines of DSM and 
ICD and describe medico-legal implications of paraphilic disorder by 
referring scientific literature and legal justification (if any). Describe 
and discuss various paraphilias in the context of informed consent 
during any sexual interaction. 
K K/KH Y LGT, SGT/ Practicals / 
Seminars 
Written/ Viva voce  
FM8.7 Describe legitimacy and its medico legal importance. Describe 
and discuss how ‘signs’ of virginity (so called ‘virginity test ’, 
including finger tests (on female genitalia) are unscientific, 
inhuman and discriminatory. Describe and discuss how to 
appraise the courts about unscientific basis of these tests if 
court orders it. 
K K/KH Y LGT, SGT/ Practicals / 
Seminars 
Written/ Viva voce  
FM8.8 Discuss the medico legal aspects of pregnancy and delivery, signs of 
pregnancy, precipitate labour, superfoetation, superfecundation
and signs of recent and remote delivery in living and dead 
K K/KH Y LGT, SGT/ Practicals / 
Seminars 
Written/ Viva voce  
Number COMPETENCY 
The student should be able to 
Predominant 
Domain 
K/S/A/C 
Level 
K/KH/S 
H/P 
Core 
(Y/N) 
Suggested Teaching 
Learning method 
Suggested 
Assessment 
method 
Number 
required 
to certify 
P 
FM8.9 Discuss disputed paternity and maternity K K/KH Y LGT, SGT/ Practicals / 
Seminars 
Written/ Viva voce  
FM8.10 Discuss Pre-conception and Pre Natal Diagnostic 
Techniques (PC&PNDT) - Prohibition of Sex Selection Act 
2003 and Domestic Violence Act 2005 with Amendments 
K K/KH Y LGT, SGT/ Practicals / 
Seminars 
Written/ Viva voce  
FM8.11 Define and discuss impotence, sterility, frigidity, sexual dysf unction,
premature ejaculation. Discuss the causes of impotence and sterility
in male and female 
K K/KH Y LGT, SGT/ Practicals / 
Seminars 
Written/ Viva voce

150  
FM8.12 Discuss Sterilization of male and female, artificial inseminati on, Test
Tube Baby, surrogate mother, hormonal replacement therapy with
respect to appropriate national and state laws 
K K/KH Y LGT, SGT/ Practicals / 
Seminars 
Written/ Viva voce  
FM8.13 Discuss the relative importance of surgical methods of
contraception(vasectomy and tubectomy) as methods of 
contraception in the National Family Planning Programme 
K K/KH N SDL Written  
FM 8.14 Discuss Assisted Reproductive Technology Regulation Act 2021 and 
Surrogacy Act 2021 for accreditation, supervision and regulation of 
ART and Surrogacy Clinics in India.  
K K/KH Y LGT, SGT/ Practicals / 
Seminars 
Written  
FM8.15 Define, classify and discuss abortion, methods of MTP and criminal 
abortion and complication of abortion. MTP Act 2021 and recent 
amendments. 
K K/KH Y LGT, SGT/ Practicals / 
Seminars 
Written  
FM8.16 Describe evidences of abortion - living and dead, duties of doctor in 
cases of abortion, investigations of death due to criminal abortion 
K K/KH Y LGT, SGT/ Practicals / 
Seminars 
Written/ Viva voce  
Topic 9: Clinical forensic medicine - child abuse and torture and human rights Number of competencies: (04) Number of competen cies that require certification : (NIL) 
Number COMPETENCY 
The student should be able to 
Predominant 
Domain 
K/S/A/C 
Level 
K/KH/S 
H/P 
Core 
(Y/N) 
Suggested Teaching 
Learning method 
Suggested 
Assessment 
method 
Number 
required 
to certify 
P 
FM9.1 Describe and discuss child abuse and battered baby syndrome 
K K/KH Y LGT, SGT/ Practicals/ Seminars Written/ Viva voce 
 
FM9.2 Describe and discuss issues relat ing to torture, identification  o f  
injuries caused by torture and its sequalae, management of torture
Survivors 
K K/KH N SD L Written/ Viva voce  
FM9.3 Describe and discuss guidelines and Protocols of National Human 
Rights Commission regarding torture 
K K/KH N SDL Written/ Viva voce  
FM9.4 Should be able to demonstrate the professionalism while dealing with 
survivor of torture 
and human right violations, sexual assaults- psychological 
consultation, rehabilitation 
A, C K/KH/SH Y LGT, SGT/
Practicals / Seminars 
Written/ Viva voce

151  
Topic 10: Medical jurisprudence (medical law and ethics) Number  of competencies: (29) Number of competencies that require cert ification : (NIL) 
FM10.1 Describe Medical Ethics and explain its historical emergence K KH Y LGT, SGT/ Practicals / 
Seminars 
Written/ Viva voce  
FM10.2 Describe the Indian Medical Register K KH Y LGT, SGT/ Practicals / 
Seminars 
Written/ Viva voce  
FM10.3 Describe the functions and role o f National Medical Commission 
and State Medical Councils 
K KH Y LGT, SGT/ Practicals / 
Seminars 
Written/ Viva voce  
FM10.4 Describe the Code of Medical Ethics 2002 conduct, Etiquette 
and Ethics in medical practice and unethical practices & the 
dichotomy 
K KH Y LGT, SGT/ Practicals / 
Seminars 
Written/ Viva voce  
FM10.5 Rights/privileges of a medical practitioner, penal erasure, 
infamous conduct, disciplin ary Committee, disciplinary 
competencies, warning notice and penal erasure 
K KH Y LGT, SGT/ Practicals / 
Seminars 
Written/ Viva voce  
FM10.6 Describe the Laws in Relation to medical practice and the duties of 
a medical practitioner towards patients and society 
K K/KH Y LGT, SGT/ Practicals / 
Seminars 
Written/ Viva voce  
FM10.7 Describe and discuss ethi cs related to HIV patients and legal 
aspects as per The Human Immunodeficiency Virus and Acquired 
Immune Deficiency Syndrome (Prevention and Control) Act, 2017.
K K/KH Y LGT, SGT/ Practicals / 
Seminars 
Written/ Viva voce  
FM10.8 Describe the Consumer Protecti on Act-2019 (Medical Indemnity 
Insurance, Civil Litigati ons and Compensations) 
K KH Y LGT, SGT/ Practicals / 
Seminars 
Written/ Viva voce  
FM10.9 Describe the medico - legal issues in relation to family violen ce, 
violation of human rights, NHRC and doctors 
K KH N SD L Written/ Viva voce  
FM10.10 Describe communication between doctors, public and media K KH Y LGT, SGT/ Practicals / 
Seminars 
Written/ Viva voce  
FM10.11 Describe and discuss euthanasia and Do not Resuscitate (DNR) K KH Y LGT, SGT/
Practicals / Seminars 
Written/ Viva voce  
FM10.12 Discuss legal and ethical issues in relation to stem cell research K KH N SDL Written/ Viva voce

152  
FM10.13 Describe social aspects of Medico-legal cases with respect to 
survivors of assault, rape, attempted suicide, homicide, domestic 
violence, dowry- related cases 
K KH Y LGT, SGT/ Practicals / 
Seminars 
Written/ Viva voce  
FM10.14 Describe & discuss the challenges in managing medico-legal cases 
including development of skills in relationship management – 
Human behavior, communication skills, conflict resolution 
Techniques 
K KH Y LGT, SGT/ Practicals / 
Seminars 
Written/ Viva voce  
FM10.15 Describe the principles of handling pressure – definition, types, 
causes, sources and skills for managing the pressure while dealing 
with medico-legal cases by the doctor 
K KH Y LGT, SGT/ Practicals / 
Seminars 
Written/ Viva voce  
FM10.16 Describe and discuss Bioethics K KH Y LGT, SGT/ Practicals / 
Seminars 
Written/ Viva voce  
FM10.17 Describe and discuss ethical Principles: Respect for autonomy, non- 
malfeasance, beneficence & justice 
K KH Y LGT, SGT/ Practicals / 
Seminars 
Written/ Viva voce  
FM10.18 Describe and discuss medical negligence including civil and criminal 
negligence, contributory negligence, corporate negligence, 
vicarious liability, Res Ipsa Loquitor, prevention of medical 
negligence and defenses in medical negligence litigations 
K KH Y LGT, SGT/ Practicals / 
Seminars 
Written/ Viva voce  
FM10.19 Define Consent. Describe different types of consent and 
ingredients of informed consent. Describe the rules of consent and 
importance of consent in relation to age, emergency situation, 
K KH Y LGT, SGT/ Practicals / 
Seminars 
Written/ Viva voce  
 mental illness and alcohol intoxication       
FM10.20 Describe therapeutic  privilege, Malingering, therapeutic 
Misadventure, Professional Secrecy, Human Experimentation 
K KH Y LGT, SGT/ Practicals / 
Seminars 
Written/ Viva voce  
FM10.21 Describe Products liability and Medical Indemnity Insurance K KH Y LGT, SGT/ Practicals / 
Seminars 
Written/ Viva voce  
FM10.22 Explain Oath – Hippocrates, Charaka and Sushruta and procedure 
for administration of Oath. 
K KH Y LGT, SGT/ Practicals / 
Seminars 
Written/ Viva voce

153  
FM10.23 Describe the modified Declaration of Geneva and its relevance K KH Y LGT, SGT/ Practicals / 
Seminars 
Written/ Viva voce  
FM10.24 Enumerate rights, privileges and duties of a Registered Medical 
Practitioner. Discuss doctor- patient relationship: professional 
secrecy and privileged communication 
K KH Y LGT, SGT/ Practicals / 
Seminars 
Written/ Viva voce  
FM10.25 Clinical research & Ethics Discuss human experimentation including 
clinical trials 
K KH N SD L Written/ Viva voce  
FM10.26 Discuss the constitution and functions of ethical committees K KH Y LGT, SGT/ Practicals / 
Seminars 
Written/ Viva voce  
FM10.27 Describe and discuss Ethical Guidelines for Biomedical Research  
on Human Subjects & Animals 
K KH N SDL Written/ Viva voce  
FM10.28 Demonstrate respect to laws relating to medical practice and 
Ethical code of conduct prescribed by National Medical 
Commission and rules and regulations prescribed by it from time to
time 
A and C SH Y LGT, SGT/ Practicals / 
Seminars 
Written/ Viva voce  
FM10.29 Demonstrate ability to conduct research in pursuance to 
guidelines or research ethics 
A and C KH/SH Y LGT, SGT/ Practicals / 
Seminars 
Written/ Viva voce  
Topic 11: Forensic psychiatry Number o f competencies: (06) Number o f competencies that require certification : (NIL) 
Number COMPETENCY 
The student should be able to 
Predominant 
Domain 
K/S/A/C 
Level 
K/KH/S 
H/P 
Core 
(Y/N) 
Suggested Teaching 
Learning method 
Suggested 
Assessment 
method 
Number 
required 
to certify 
P 
FM11.1 Classify common mental illnesses including post-traumatic 
stress disorder (PTSD) 
K K/KH Y LGT, SGT/ Practicals / 
Seminars 
Written/ Viva voce  
FM11.2 Define, classify and describe delusions, hallucinations, illusion, lucid 
interval and obsessions with exemplification 
K K/KH Y LGT, SGT/ Practicals / 
Seminars 
Written/ Viva voce  
FM11.3 Describe Civil and criminal responsibilities of a mentally ill person K K/KH Y LGT, SGT/ Practicals / 
Seminars 
Written/ Viva voce  
FM11.4 Differentiate between tru e mental illness from feigned mental illness K K/KH Y LGT, SGT/ Practicals / 
Seminars 
Written/ Viva voce

154  
FM11.5 Describe & discuss Delirium tremors K K/KH Y LGT, SGT/ Practicals / 
Seminars 
Written/ Viva voce  
FM11.6 Describe the Indian Mental Health Act, 2017 and recent 
amendments with special refere nce to admission, care and 
discharge of a mentally ill person 
K K/KH N SD L Written/ Viva voce  
Topic 12: Forensic laboratory investigation, recent advances and trace evidences Number of competencies: (06) Number of compet encies that require certification : (NIL) 
FM12.1 Describe different types of specimen and tissues to be collecte d 
both in the living and dead: Body fluids (blood, urine, semen, faeces 
saliva), Skin, Nails, tooth pulp, vaginal smear, viscera, skull, 
specimen for histo-pathological examination, blood grouping, HLA 
Typing and DNA Fingerprinting. Describe Locard’s Exchange 
Principle 
K K/KH Y LGT, SGT/ Practicals / 
Seminars 
Written/ Viva voce  
FM12.2 Describe the methods of sample collection, preservation, labelling, 
dispatch, and interpretation of reports 
K K/KH Y LGT, SGT/ Practicals / 
Seminars 
Written/ Viva voce  
FM12.3 Cyber Forensic in relation to Privacy of Medical Documents K K/KH Y LGT, SGT/
Practicals / Seminars 
Written/ Viva voce  
FM12.4 Demonstrate professionalism while sending the biological or tra ce
evidences to Forensic Science la boratory, specifying the requir ed
tests to be carried out, objectives of preservation of evidences sent
for examination, personal discussions on interpretation of findings 
A and C KH/SH Y LGT, SGT/ Practicals / 
Seminars, DOAPs 
Viva voce / OSPE  
FM12.5 Demonstrate the professionalism while preparing reports in medico
legal situations, interpretation of findings and makin g
inference/opinion, collection preservation and dispatch of biological
or trace evidences 
A and C SH Y LGT, SGT/ Practicals / 
Seminars 
OSPE/Viva voce

155  
FM12.6 Enumerate the indications and describe the principles and 
appropriate use for: 
- DNA profiling 
-Facial reconstruction 
- Polygraph (Lie Detector) 
- Narcoanalysis, 
- Brain Mapping, Digital autopsy, 
- Virtual Autopsy, Imaging technologies 
 
 
- 
K K/KH N SDL Written/ Viva voce  
 Topic 13: Toxicology  Number of competencies: (21) Number of competencies that requir e certification : (NIL) 
FM13.1 Describe the history of Toxicology K K/KH Y LGT, SGT/
Practicals / Seminars 
Written/ Viva voce  
FM13.2 Define the terms Toxicology, Forensic Toxicology, Clinic al 
Toxicology and poison. 
K K/KH Y LGT, SGT/
Practicals / Seminars 
Written/ Viva voce  
FM13.3 Describe the various types of poisons, Toxicokinetics, and 
Toxicodynamics and diagnosis of poisoning in living and dead 
K K/KH Y LGT, SGT/ Practicals / 
Seminars 
Written/viva voce  
FM13.4 Describe the Laws in relations to poisons including NDPS Act, 
Medico-legal aspects of poisons 
K K/KH Y LGT, SGT/
Practicals / Seminars 
Written/ Viva voce  
FM13.5 Describe Medico-legal autopsy in cases of poisoning including 
preservation and dispatch of viscera for chemical analysis 
K K/KH Y LGT, SGT/ Practicals / 
Seminars, Autopsy, DOAP 
Written/ Viva 
voce/OSPE 
 
FM13.6 Describe the general symptoms,  principles of diagnosis and 
management of common poisons encountered in India 
K K/KH Y LGT, SGT/ Practicals / 
Seminars, Bed side clinic, 
DOAP 
Written/ Viva 
voce/OSCE 
 
FM13.7 Describe simple Bedside clinic tests to detect poison/drug in a 
patient’s body fluids 
K K/KH Y LGT, SGT/ Practicals / 
Seminars, Bed side clinic, 
DOAP 
Written/ Viva 
voce/OSCE 
 
FM13.8 Describe  basic  methodologies  in  treatment  of  poisoning: 
decontamination, supportive therapy, antidote therapy, 
competencies of enhanced elimination 
K K/KH Y LGT, SGT/ Practicals / 
Seminars, Bed side clinic, 
DOAP 
Written/ Viva 
voce/OSCE

156  
FM13.9 Describe the procedure of intimation of suspicious cases or act ual 
cases of foul play to the police, maintenance of records, 
preservation and  dispatch of relevant samples  for laboratory
analysis. 
K K/KH Y LGT, SGT/ Practicals / 
Seminars 
Written/ Viva 
voce 
 
FM13.10 Describe the general principles of Analytical Toxicology and gi ve a
brief description of analytical methods available for toxicolog ical
analysis: Chromatography – Thin Layer Chromatography, Ga s
Chromatography, Liquid Chromatography and Atomic 
Absorption Spectroscopy 
K K/KH Y LGT, SGT/ Practicals / 
Seminars 
Written/ Viva 
voce 
 
FM13.11 Describe General Principles and basic methodologies in treatmen t
of poisoning: decontamination, supportive therapy, antidot e
therapy, competencies of enhanced elimination with regard to:
Caustics Inorganic – sulphuri c, nitric, and hydrochloric 
acids; Organic- Carbolic Acid (phenol), Oxalic and acetylsalicylic acids
K K/KH Y LGT, SGT/ Practicals / 
Seminars, Bed side clinic, 
Autopsy, DOAP 
Written/ Viva 
voce/OSCE 
 
FM13.12 Describe General Principles and basic methodologies in treatmen t
of poisoning: decontamination, supportive therapy, antidot e
therapy, competencies of enhanced elimination with regard to
Phosphorus, Iodine, Barium 
K K/KH Y LGT, SGT/ Practicals / 
Seminars, Bed side clinic, 
Autopsy, DOAP 
Written/ Viva 
voce/OSCE 
 
FM13.13 Describe General Principles and basic methodologies in treatmen t
of poisoning: decontamination, supportive therapy, antidot e
therapy, competencies of enhanced elimination with regard to
Arsenic, lead, mercury, copper, iron. 
K K/KH Y LGT, SGT/ Practicals / 
Seminars, Bed side clinic, 
Autopsy, DOAP 
Written/ Viva 
voce/OSCE 
 
FM13.14 Describe General Principles and basic methodologies in treatmen t
of poisoning: decontamination, supportive therapy, antidot e
therapy, competencies of enhanced elimination with regard t o
Ethanol, methanol, ethylene glycol Local Made Liquor and 
Hooch Tragedy 
K K/KH Y LGT, SGT/ Practicals / 
Seminars, Bed side clinic, 
Autopsy, DOAP 
Written/ Viva 
voce/OSCE 
 
FM13.15 Describe General Principles and basic methodologies in treatmen t
of poisoning: decontamination, supportive therapy, antidot e
therapy, competencies of enhanced elimination with regard t o
Organophosphates, Carbamates, Organochlorines, Pyrethroids, 
Paraquat, Aluminium and Zinc phosphide 
K K/KH Y LGT, SGT/ Practicals / 
Seminars, Bed side clinic, 
Autopsy, DOAP 
Written/ Viva 
voce/OSCE

157  
FM13.16 Describe General Principles and basic methodologies in treatmen t
of poisoning: decontamination, supportive therapy, antidot e
therapy, competencies of enhanced elimination with regard t o
Ammonia, carbon monoxide, hydrogen cyanide & derivatives,
methyl isocyanate, tear (riot control) gases 
K K/KH Y LGT, SGT/ Practicals / 
Seminars, Bed side clinic, 
Autopsy, DOAP 
Written/ Viva 
voce/OSCE 
 
FM13.17 Describe General Principles and basic methodologies in treatment of
poisoning: decontamination, supportive therapy, antidote therap y,
competencies of enhanced elimination with regard to: 
i. Antipyretics – Paracetamol, Salicylates 
ii. Anti-Infectives (Common antibiotics – an overview) 
iii.  Neuropsychotoxicology Barbi turates, benzodiazepines, 
phenytoin, lithium, haloperidol, neuroleptics, tricyclics 
K K/KH Y LGT, SGT/ Practicals / 
Seminars, Bed side clinic, 
Autopsy, DOAP 
Written/ Viva 
voce/OSCE 
 
FM13.18 Describe General Principles and basic methodologies in treatment of
poisoning: decontamination, supportive therapy, antidote therap y,
competencies of enhanced elimination with regard to: 
iv. Narcotic Analgesics, Anaesthetics, and Muscle Relaxants 
v.Cardiovascular Toxicology Cardio toxic plants – oleander, 
Cerbera odollam, aconite, digitalis 
vi. Gastro- Intestinal and Endocrinal Drugs – Insulin 
K K/KH Y LGT, SGT/ Practicals / 
Seminars, Bed side clinic, 
Autopsy, DOAP 
Written/ Viva 
voce/OSCE 
  
FM13.19 Describe features and management of Snake bite, scorpion sting, 
bee and wasp sting and spider bite 
K K/KH Y LGT, SGT/ Practicals / 
Seminars, Autopsy 
Written/ Viva voce   
FM13.20 Describe features and management of abuse/poisoning of Tobacco,
cannabis, amphetamines, cocaine, hallucinogens, designer drugs &
solvent, Mushroom Poisoning, Food Poisoning 
K K/KH Y LGT, SGT/ Practicals / 
Seminars, Autopsy 
Written/ Viva voce   
FM13.21 Describe toxic pollution of environment, its medico-legal aspects 
&toxic hazards of occupation and industry 
K K/KH N SDL Written/ Viva voce

158  
Topic 14: Skills in forensic medicine & toxicology Number of co mpetencies: (20)  Number of competencies that require certification: (5)  
FM14.1 Examine and prepare Medico-legal report of an injured person with 
different etiologies in a simulated/ supervised environment 
S SH/P Y Bedside clinic (ward/ 
casualty), 
SGT/ Practicals / Seminars 
Log book/ Skill 
station/Viva voce / 
OSCE 
3 
FM14.2 Demonstrate the correct technique of clinical examination in a
suspected case of poisoning & prepare medico-legal report in a 
simulated/ supervised environment 
S SH Y Bedside clinic 
(ward/casualty), 
SGT/ Practicals / Seminars 
Log book/ Skill 
station/Viva voce / 
OSCE 
 
FM14.3 Assist and demonstrate the proper technique in collecting, 
preserving and dispatch of the exhibits in a suspected case of
poisoning, along with clinical examination 
S SH Y Bedside clinic,
SGT/ Practicals / Seminars, 
DOAP 
Skill lab/ Viva voce  
FM14.4 Conduct and prepare report of estimation of age of a person for  
medico-legal and other purposes & prepare medico-legal report in a
simulated/ supervised environments 
S KH Y SGT/ Practicals / Seminars, 
Demonstration 
Log book/ Skill 
station/Viva voce / 
OSCE 
 
FM14.5 Examine and prepare Medical Ce rtificate Of Cause Of Death 
(MCCD)in a simulated/ supervised environment 
S SH/P Y Bedside clinic (ward/ 
casualty), 
SGT/ Practicals / Seminars 
Log book/ Skill 
station/Viva voce / 
OSCE 
3 
FM14.6 Conduct & prepare post-mortem examination report of varied 
etiologies (at least 15) in a simulated/ supervised environment 
S KH Y SGT/ Practicals / Seminars, 
Autopsy, DOAP 
Log book/ Skill 
station/Viva voce / 
OSCE 
3 
FM14.7 Demonstrate the correct technique to perform and identify ABO 
&RH blood group of a person 
S SH Y SGT/ Practicals / Seminars, 
DOAP 
Log book/Skill 
station/Viva voce 
 
FM14.8 Demonstrate examination of & present an opinion after 
examination  of  skeletal  remains  in  a   s i m u l a t e d /   s u p e r v i s e d
environment 
S SH Y SGT/ Practicals / Seminars, 
DOAP 
Log book/Skill 
station/Viva voce 
 
FM14.9 Demonstrate ability to identify & prepare medico legal inferenc e
from specimens obtained from various types of injuries e.g.
contusion, abrasion, laceration, firearm wounds, burns, head injury
and fracture of bone 
S KH Y SGT/ Practicals / Seminars, 
DOAP 
Log book/Skill 
station/Viva 
voce/ OSPE

159  
FM14.10 To identify & describe weapons of medico legal importance which
are commonly used e.g. lathi, knife, kripan, axe, gandasa, gupt i,
farsha, dagger, bhalla, razor & stick. Able to prepare report o f the
weapons brought by police and to give opinion regarding injurie s
present on the person as described in injury report/ PM report so as
to connect weapon with the injuries. (Prepare injury report/ PM
report must be provided to 
connect the weapon with the injuries) 
S KH Y SGT/ Practicals / Seminars, 
DOAP 
Log book/Skill 
station/Viva voce/ 
OSPE 
 
FM14.11 Describe the contents and structure of bullet and cartridges used &to
provide medico- legal interpretation from these 
S KH Y SGT/ Practicals / Seminars, 
DOAP 
Log book/ Skill  
FM14.12 To estimate the age of foetus by post-mortem examination S KH Y SGT/ Practicals / Seminars, 
DOAP 
Theory/ Clinical 
assessment/ Viva 
voce 
 
FM14.13 To examine & prepare report of an alleged accused person 
in cases of various sexual offences in a simulated/ supervised  
S KH Y SGT/ Practicals / Seminars, 
DOAP 
Log book/ Skill 
station/Viva voce / 
3 
 environment. Demonstrate an understanding of framing the 
opinion, preservation and dispatch of trace evidencxes in such cases. 
Describe and discuss personal opinions and their impact on such 
examinations and the need for objectivity/ neutrality to avoid 
prejudice influencing the case. 
    OSCE  
FM14.14 To examine & prepare medico-legal report on an alleged victim/ 
survivor of various sexual offences in a simulated/ supervised 
environment. (Guidelines and protocols of Medico Legal Care for 
Survivors/ Victims of sexual violence; Ministry of Health and Family 
Welfare, GOI- with latest modifications if any). Demonstrate an 
understanding of framing the opinion, preservation and dispatch of 
trace evidences in such cases. Describe and discuss sympathetic/ 
empathetic examination and interview of victims/ survivors of 
sexual assault, including presence of trusted adult figure (person) 
in cases of minor victims/ survivors. 
S KH Y  
SGT/ Practicals / Seminars, 
DOAP 
 
Log book/ Skill 
station/Viva voce / 
OSCE 
 
3 
FM14.15 To examine & prepare medico-legal report of drunk person in a 
simulated/ supervised environment 
S KH Y SGT/ Practicals / Seminars, 
Bed side clinic, DOAP 
Log book/ Skill 
station/Viva voce / 
OSCE

160  
FM14.16 To identify & draw medico-legal inference from common poisons
e.g. dhatura, castor, cannabis, opium, aconite copper sulphate,  
pesticides compounds, marking nut, oleander, Nux vomica, abrus
seeds, Snakes, capsicum, calotropis, lead compounds & tobacco. 
S KH Y SGT/ Practicals / Seminars, 
DOAP 
Log book/ Viva voce  
FM14.17 To examine & prepare medico-legal report of a person in police, 
judicial custody or referred by Court of Law and violation of human 
rights as requirement of NHRC, who 
has been brought for medical examination
S KH Y SGT/ Practicals / Seminars, 
DOAP 
Log book/ Skill 
station/Viva voce / 
OSCE 
 
FM14.18 To record and certify dying declaration in a simulated/ supervised 
environment 
S KH Y SGT/ Practicals / Seminars, 
Role Play, Bed side clinic 
DOAP 
Log book/ Skill 
station/Viva voce 
/OSCE 
 
FM14.19 To  collect,  preserve,  seal  and  dispatch  exhibits  for  DNA-
Fingerprinting using various formats of different laboratories. 
S KH Y LGT ,
SGT/ Practicals / Seminars, 
Log book/ Skill 
station/Viva voce 
 
FM14.20 To give expert medical/ medico-legal evidence in Court of law S KH Y LGT,
SGT/ Practicals / Seminars, 
DOAP, role play, Court Visits
Log book/ 
Viva voce/OSCE

161  
 
 
LIST OF CONTRIBUTORS

162  
 
Anatomy 
Chairperson: Dr. Praveen R Singh , Professor of Anatomy and Medical Education, Assistant Dean, Basic Sciences Education, Convener, NMC executive committee on FDP, 
Convenor, NMC-Nodal Centre for MET , Pramukhswami Medical College, Karamsad-388325, Gujarat. 
Members: 
1. Dr. Praveen B Iyer, Professor (Additional), Department of Anatomy, Convenor, NMC Nodal Centre Seth G S Medical College, Parel, Mumbai – 400012, Maharashtra 
2. Dr. Vivek Singh Malik, Professor, Department of Anatomy, Pt. B.D. Sharma PGIMS, Rohtak, 124001, Haryana 
3. Dr. Raghunath Shahaji More, Professor, Department of Anatomy, I nstitute of Medical Sciences, BANARAS HINDU University, Varanas i-221005, Uttar Pradesh 
4. Dr. G Manoj Kumar Reddy, Senior Associate Professor, Department of Anatomy, Government Medical College, Kadapa, 516002, Andhra Pradesh. 
Biochemistry 
Chairperson: Dr. Kavitarati Dharwadkar, Professor and Head, Dir ector Clinical Biochemistry, Faculty Regional Centre for Medica l education Technologies, SAIMS, Sri Aurobindo 
Medical College and PGI, SAU, Indore453555, Madhya Pradesh 
Members: 
1. Dr. Vilas U. Chavan, Professor & Head, Dept of Biochemistry, SMIMER, Surat, 395010 Gujarat.. 
2. Dr. Rachna Sabharwal, Professor & Head, Dept. of Biochemistry, Government Medical College, Jammu 180001, Jammu & Kashmir 
3. Dr. S P Mishra, Professor & Head, Dept. Of Biochemistry, Institute of Medical Sciences, BHU, Varanasi, 221001, Uttar Pradesh 
4. Dr. Mainak Roy, Associate Professor, Dept. of Biochemistry, Faculty, NMC Regional Centre Jorhat Medical College, Jorhat, 785001Assam.. 
Physiology 
Chairperson: Dr. Aparna Garg, Professor and Head, Department of  Physiology, Convenor, NMC- Regional Center Mahatma Gandhi Medi cal College and Hospital, Sitapura Jaipur 
302022 Rajasthan. 
Members: 
1. Dr. Debasish Chakraborty, Professor, Department of Physiology, Agartala Govt. Medical College Kunjavan, Agartala 799006 Tripura (West). 
2. Dr. Ravi Kaushik, Associate Professor, Department of Physiology, Maulana Azad Medical College & Associated Hospitals, New Delhi- 110002. 
3. Dr. Tripti Waghmare, Professor, Department of Physiology, JNMC,  DMIHER(DU), Sawangi (M), Wardha, 442001, Maharashtra 
4. Dr. Rajiva Kumar Singh, Prof & HOD, Department of Physiology, Government of Bihar , Patna Medical college Patna 800004, Bihar.

163  
Microbiology 
Chairperson: Dr. Namrata Kumari, Professor and Head, Department of Microbiology, Convenor, NMC Regional Centre (RC-MET), Indira Gandhi Institute of Medical Sciences, 
Patna- 800014 , Bihar. 
Members: 
1. Dr. Suman Singh, Professor and Head, Department of Microbiology, Co-Convenor, NMC Nodal Centre, Pramukh Swami medical College, Karamsad -388325, Gujarat. 
2. Dr. Purnima Barua, Former Convenor, NMC Regional Centre- Jorhat, Professor, Department of Microbiology, Tinsukia Medical Colle ge, Tinsukia- 786146, Assam. 
3. Dr. Amresh Kumar Singh, Associate professor and Head, Department of Microbiology, Member, Medical Education Unit, BRD Medical College, Gorakhpur-273013, Uttar 
Pradesh 
4. Dr. M R Vasanthapriyan, Associate Professor, Institute of Microbiology, Member, NMC Regional Centre (RC-MET), Madurai Medical College Madurai-625020, Tamil 
Nadu 
Pathology 
Chairperson: Dr. Mrs. Sunita Vagha, Professor and Controller of Examination, Department of Pathology, Jawaharlal Nehru Medical College DMIHER, Sawangi Meghe, Wardha- 
442005, Maharashtra  
Members: 
1. Dr. Cherry Shah, Professor and Dean, Department of Pathology, S mt NHL Municipal Medical College, Ahmadabad- 380014, Gujarat 
2. Dr. V. Geeta, Professor and HOD, Department of Pathology, Kakat iya Medical College, Warangal- 506007, Telangana 
3. Dr. K. Chandramouleeswari, Professor and Head, Institute of Chi ld Health, Madras Medical College, Chennai- 600008, Tamil Nadu 
4. Dr. Anirudha V Kushtagi, Professor and Head, Department of Pathology, Koppal Institute of Medical Sciences, Koppal- 583231, Karnataka 
 
Pharmacology 
Chairperson: Dr. Dinesh Kuma Badyal, Vice Principal (Med Edu), Professor & Head, Department of Pharmacology, National Convener, NMC-Advance Course in Medical 
Education, Convener, NMC Nodal Center for Faculty Development, Member-NMC National Curriculum Committee, Christian Medical Col lege, Ludhiana-141008, Punjab 
Members: 
1. Dr. Shipra Jain, Professor, Dept of Pharmacology, MEU Resource Faculty, NMC-RC, Mahatma Gandhi Medical College & Hospital Jaip ur-302022 Rajasthan. 
2. Dr .Trupti Rekha Swain, Prof and Head, Dept of Pharmacology, MEU Faculty member, NMC Regional Centre, S C B Medical College, Cuttack, 753007,Odisha. 
3. Dr. Juhi Kalra, Professor, Department of Pharmacology, Convenor, NMC Regional Centre, Himalayan Institute of Medical Sciences (HIMS), Dehradun-248001,Uttarakhand 
4 Dr. Ashish Yadav, Professor and Head, Department of Pharmacology, UNS Autonomous State Medical College, Jaunpur - 222003, Uttar Pradesh.

164  
Forensic Medicine & Toxicology 
Chairperson: Dr Sandeep Sitaram Kadu, Controller of Examination s, Maharashtra University of Hea lth Sciences, Nashik,422004 , Maharashtra. 
Members: 
1. Dr. Rajesh Kumar Baranwal, Profe ssor(FMT) & Principal, Maharshi Devraha Baba Autonomous State, Medical College, Deoria 274001, Uttar Pradesh. 
2. Dr. Raktim Pratim Tamuli, Associate Professor, Dept. of Forensic Medicine and Toxicology, Gauhati Medical College, Guwahati - 781032, Assam 
3. Dr. Venkatesan M, Associate Prof essor, Sri Ramachandra Medical College and Research Institute, Porur, Chennai 600116, Tamil Nadu 
4. Dr. Sanjoy Das, Professor & Head, Forensic Medicine & Toxicology, Himalayan Institute of Medical Sciences, Jolly Grant, Dehradun- 248140, Uttarakhand 
 
Community Medicine 
Chairperson: Dr. Dr. Annarao Kulkarni, Professor and Head, Community Medicine, Sri Madhusudan Sai Institute of Medical Science s and Research Muddenahalli: 562101, 
Chikkaballapur District, Karnataka 
Members: 
1. Dr. Pankaj B. Shah, A ssociate Dean Research, Professor, Department of Community Medicine, SRMC & RI, Sri Ramachandra Institute of Higher Education & Research 
(SRIHER), NMC Executive Committee member of FDP, Member DOME, NMC SRMC Nodal center, Porur, Chennai 600116, Tamil Nadu, 
2. Dr. Gaurav Kamboj, Associate Professor, Dept of Community Medic ine, Deputy Dean (Academics), Kalpana Chawla Government Medical  College, Karnal- 132001 Haryana 
3. Dr. Shib Sekhar Datta, Prof. and Head, Department of Community Medicine, Tripura Medical College & Dr. BRAM Teaching Hospital Agartala, 799014,Tripura 
4. Dr. Abhishek V Raut, Professor, Department of Community Medicine, Mahatma Gandhi Institute of Medical Sciences, Sevagram, 442102, Maharashtra 
 
Ophthalmology 
Chairperson: Dr Viswamithra P, Professor of Ophthalmology, GMC,  Paderu, Former HOD of Ophthalmology, Andhra Medical College, Faculty, NMC Regional Centre, Addl 
DME& Superintendent, GGH, Paderu,  ASR District-Pin Code 531024, Andhra Pradesh .  
Members: 
1. Dr. Radha Ishwar Dass, Associate professor, Ophthalmology, M P Shah govt medical college. Jamnagar, Gujarat. 
2. Dr. K. Kavitha, Professor & Head of Ophthalmology, Madurai Medical college, Madurai, 62t5017, Tamil Nadu 
3. Dr. Jisha K, Professor, Department of Ophthalmology, Govt Medical college, Gandhinagar, PO Kottayam 68600 Kerala  
4. Dr. Nitin Nema, Professor in Department of Ophthalmology, and C onvener, NMC Regional Center for MET, Sri Aurobindo Medical Col lege & Postgraduate Institute, Indore, 
453555, Maharashtra  
5. Dr. Suneetha N, Professor and Head, Dept of Ophthalmology, St John's Medical College, Bangalore 560034, Karnataka

165  
Otorhinolaryngology 
Chairperson: Dr. T. Indra, Profe ssor of ENT, Member MEU, Madras Medical College, Rajiv Gandhi Government General Hospital Chennai.600003, Tamil Nadu 
Members: 
1. Dr. Saurabh Gandhi, Associate Pr ofessor, NHL Municipal Medical College, Faculty, Nodal Center, Ahmedabad, Gujarat 
2. Dr. Vishwambhar Singh, Professor department of Otorhinolaryngol ogy, Institute of Medical Science, Banaras Hindu University, Va ranasi 221005, Uttar Pradesh 
3. Dr. Subhabrata Sengupta, Professor Department of ENT, Faculty Member NMC Regional Centre, ESIC PGIMSR & Medical College, Joka,  700104, Kolkata 
4. Dr. Sridhara S, Associate professor and head of the department, Shivamogga institute of medical sciences, Shimoga. Karnataka. 
 
General Medicine 
Chairperson: Dr. P. V. Balamurugan, Professor, Department of me dicine, Co-Convenor, NMC Regional Centre, Madurai Medical College Madurai-625020, Tamil Nadu. 
Members: 
1. Dr. Santosh B Salagre, Professor and Unit Head, Department of Medicine, Co-Convenor, NMC Nodal Centre, Seth G S Medical College, Mumbai - 400012, Maharashtra. 
2. Dr. Mehjabin Hirani, Associate Professor and Unit Head, Departm ent of Medicine, MPSGMC, Jamnagar-361008, Gujarat. 
3. Dr. Sudhir Kumar, Professor and Unit head, Department of General Medicine, Co-convenor, NMC Regional Centre, IGIMS, Patna, Bihar- 800001. 
4. Dr. Neeraj Manikath, Assistant professor, Department of Medicine, Member NMC Regional C entre, GMCH Kozhikode, 673008,Kerala. 
Paediatrics 
Chairperson: Dr Jayant Vagha, Professor, Paediatrics, JNMC, Wardha, 442001, Maharashtra, 
Members: 
1. Dr. Kundan Mittal, Professor, Paediatrics, PGIAMS, Rohtak, Hary ana. 
2. Dr. Munish Kakkar, Professor and Head, Paediatrics, MGUMST, Jaipur, Rajasthan. 
3. Dr. Kumar Angadi, Associate Professor and HOD, Paediatrics, YIMS, Yadgir, Karnataka. 
 
Psychiatry 
Chairperson: Dr. Sujata Sethi, Senior Professor, Department of Psychiatry & Co-convenor NMC Regional Center, Pt. B.D. Sharma PGIMS, Rohtak 124001, Haryana 
Members: 
1. Dr. Rajesh Kumar, Professor and Head, Department of Psychiatry , IGIMS Patna 800014, Bihar 
2. Dr. Bheemsain Tekkalaki, Associate Professor, Department of Psychiatry, Faculty, NMC Regional Center, KAHER’s J. N Medical College, Belagavi, 590010 Karnataka 
3. Dr. Smitha C A, Associate Professor, Department of Psychiatry,  Faculty, NMC Regional Centre, Govt. Medical College Kozhikode – 673008, Kerala 
4. Dr. Nilima Shah, Associate Professor, Department of Psychiatry, Faculty, NMC Regional Centre, NHL Municipal Medical College, A hmedabad 380006, Gujarat

166  
Dermatology, Venereology & Leprosy 
Chairperson: Dr Abhilasha Williams, Professor of Dermatology, Vice Principal- UG Academics, Member, NMC Nodal Center for Medical Education, Christian Medical College 
& Hospital, Ludhiana, 141008, Punjab.  
Members: 
2. Dr. Ishwara Bhat, Professor of Dermatology, Member, NMC Nodal C enter for Medical Education, St John’s Medical College Hospital, Bangalore. 560034, Karnataka 
3. Dr. C. Dharmambal, Professor of DVL, CC member MMC – Regional center, Rajiv Gandhi Govt. General Hospital, Madras Medical College, Chennai – 600003, Tamil Nadu 
4. Dr. Chaitanya Namdeo, Professor, Department of Dermatology, Venereology & Leprosy, Sri Aurobindo Medical College & PGI, Indore 453555, Maharashtra 
Obstetrics & Gynaecology 
Chairperson: Dr. Anju Agarwal, Professor and Head, Department o f Ob/Gyn, KGMU, Lucknow, Member, NMC Nodal Centre, King George Medical University, Lucknow 
226003 , Uttar Pradesh 
Members: 
1. Dr. Isukapalli Vani, Professor and Head, Department of OBG, co-Convenor, NMC regional Centre, Andhra Medical College, Visakhapatnam- 530002, Andhra Pradesh 
2. Dr. M. Laxmi Prasanna, Professor and HOD, OBG department, GGH, NIZAMABAD, 503001, Telangana. 
3. Dr. Samrat Chakrabarti, Associate Professor, Medical College Ko lkata, 88, College Street,Kolkata-700073,West Bengal 
General Surgery 
Chairperson: Dr Shailesh Kumar, Director Professor of surgery, ABVIMS Dr RML Hospital New Delhi.110001 
Members: 
1. Dr. C Gangalakshmi, MS, Professor of General Surgery, Madurai Medical College, Madurai, Tamil Nadu 
2. Dr. Satyendra Kumar Tiwary, Professor, Institute of Medical Sciences, Banaras Hindu University, Varanasi, Uttar Pradesh 
3. Dr. K Rojaramani, Professor of General surgery, Sri Venkateswara medical college, Tirupati Andhra Pradesh  
4. Dr. D. Mohan Das, M.S., Principal/Additional Director Of Medica l Medication, Government Medical College ,Narsampet, Warangal D istrict, Telangana 
Orthopaedics 
Chairperson: Dr Gyaneshwar Tonk, Professor & Head, Department of orthopaedics, Member MEU, LLRM Medical college, Meerut, Uttar  Pradesh 
Members: 
1. Dr. G V S Moorthy, Professor & Head, Department of Orthopaedics, Bhaskara Medical College, Telangana 
2. Dr. S K Saidapur, Professor Orthopaedics, JNMC, Belagavi, Karnataka 
3. Dr. Umesh Yadav, Associate Professor, Department of Orthopaedics, PGI, Rohtak, Haryana 
4. Dr. Vijendra Chauhan, Professor Orthopaedics & Director General , Academic Development SRHU, Ex Vice Chancellor and & Dean, HIM S, Baniyawala Jolly Grant, Dehradun, 
Uttarakhand

167  
Anaesthesiology 
Chairperson: Dr. G. Madhavi, Associate Professor, Department of Anaesthesiology, Member, Curriculum committee, Faculty, NMC Regional Centre, Gandhi Medical 
College, Secunderabad-500003, Telangana. 
Members: 
1. Dr. Dhrubajyoti Sarkar, Professor & Head, Department of Anaesthesiology, Member, MEU, College of Medicine & JNM Hospital, Kalyani- 741235 West Bengal. 
2. Dr. Prashant Kumar, Professor, Department of Anaesthesiology, Member, NMC Regional Centre, Pt BD Sharma PGIMS, Rohtak-124001, Haryana. 
3. Dr. Radhika. K. P., Professor, Department of Anaesthesiology, Member, Curriculum committee, Member, Institutional Research committee, Govt Medical College, Kozhikode 
-673008, Kerala. 
 
Radiodiagnosis 
Chairperson: Dr Subathra Adithan, Additional Professor, Department of Radiodiagnosis, Faculty, NMC Nodal Centre, Jawaharlal Institute of Postgraduate Medical Education and 
Research (JIPMER), Puducherry - 605006  
Member: 
1. Dr. Gaurav Mishra, Professor, Department of Radiodiagnosis, Jaw aharlal Nehru Medical College; Pro Vice Chancellor, Datta Meghe  Institute of Higher Education and Research 
(deemed to be university), W ardha – 442001 Maharashtra 
2. Dr. Ila Dushyant Desai, Professor and Head, Department of Radiodiagnosis, BJ Medical College and Civil hospital, Ahmedabad – 380016 Gujarat 
3. Dr. Ashish Verma, Professor, Department of Radiodiagnosis and Imaging, Institute of Medical Sciences, Banaras Hindu University, Varanasi – 221005 Uttar Pradesh

1 
NATIONAL MEDICAL COMMISSION 
COMPETENCY BASED UNDERGRADUATE CURRICULUM 
FOR 
THE INDIAN MEDICAL GRADUATE 
Volume II-2024

2 
COMPETENCY BASED UNDERGRADUATE CURRICULUM 
FOR THE 
INDIAN MEDICAL GRADUATE 
2024 
 
 
National Medical Commission 
Pocket-14, Sector- 8, Dwarka 
New Delhi 110 077

3  
  
FOREWORD 
 
The National Medical Commission (NMC) was created on 24th September, 2020 by the Act of Parliament replacing the erstwhile Medical Council 
of India and Board of Governors.  The foundation for making of a n Indian Medical Graduate (‘Doctor’) depends on building a soun d base of medical 
education. In the year 2019, a committed team appointed by erst while MCI revolutionized the age-old didactic teaching system i n Indian medical 
colleges by bringing in Competenc y Based Medical Education (CBM E). This unique approach has rai sed the level of medical educat ion with respect 
to quality, versatility and horizontal- vertical alignment of a ll subjects. The mandate of NMC to see that the first line of h ealth care leaders who reach 
out to the common masses empathizing with the problems of the rural populace are being met with. The two-pronged approach of increasing the quantity 
and improving the quality of medical education is being tackled with this approach. 
Education has now become student -centric and patient-centric instead of pedagogic system. The first batch of students have now  completed their training unde r
CBME implemented in 2019. It was a demand from actively involve d academia to revisit the curriculum and modify it so as to kee p abreast at international level. 
Interim years of covid pandemic also were ‘a good teaching academy’ for all. Increasing influence of artificial intelligence on student community, matched with rising 
cost of medical education and competitiveness, instead of accom modative, helping and balanced approach, has led to increasing risk of losing social i ntelligence and 
humane approach amidst the emerging doctors. The risk of creating overqualified clerks looms large on our medical system.

4  
 
A national team of experienced a s well as emerging empathetic a nd talented teachers engaged as full-time faculty in various me dical institutions 
were invited by the Undergraduate Education Board (UGMEB) of the NMC to invest their extra energy and hours to assess the curricula, examinations, 
AETCOM, vertical and horizontal integration of various subjects and bring in modifications. Each subject had committee of five persons on an average, 
from different parts of the country. Totally 93 experts have given their valuable time and energy in framing this new curriculum and all three volumes, 
prepared by their predecessors in 2019. The hard work done by them was the base on which this edifice has further been refined. 
 
We are sure that fraternity and students are going to have an e ducational journey that will be  full of fun, knowledge and expe rience sharing. 
UGMEB of the NMC acknowledges each and every one involved in th e process, named and unsung heroes who have been the part of th is exercise of 
bringing the document to the readers. 
 
 
 
Dr. Aruna V. Vanikar, President, 
Dr. Vijayendra Kumar, Member, 
UGMEB, NMC

5  
Contents Volume I 
 
S.No. Subject Legend PageNo. 
(i) Howto use the Manual 
 
8 
(ii) Definitions used in the Manual 
 
28 
(iii) Subject wise Competencies 
  
1. Anatomy AN 32 
2. Physiology PY 74 
3. Biochemistry BC 86 
4. Pharmacology PH 98 
5. Pathology PA 111 
6. Microbiology MI 130 
7. Forensic Medicine & Toxicology FM 140 
(iv) List of contributing subject experts 
 
160

6  
Contents Volume II 
 
S.No. Subject Legend PageNo. 
(i) Howto use the Manual  8 
(ii) Definitions used in the Manual  28 
(iii) Subject wise Competencies   
1. Community Medicine CM 32 
2. General Medicine GM 44 
3. Paediatrics PE 92 
4. Psychiatry PS 114 
5. Dermatology, Venereology & Leprosy DE 118 
(iv) List of contributing subject experts  125

7  
Contents Volume III 
 
S.No. Subject Legend PageNo. 
(i) Howto use the Manual  8 
(ii) Definitions used in the Manual  28 
(iii) Subject wise Competencies   
1. General Surgery SU 32 
2. Ophthalmology OP 44 
3. Otorhinolaryngology EN 50 
4. Obstetrics & Gynaecology OG 57 
5. Orthopaedics OR 74 
6. Anesthesiology AS 82 
7. Radiodiagnosis RT 87 
(iv) List of contributing subject experts  91

8  
How to use the Manual 
 
This Manual is intended for curric ulum planners in an instituti on to design learning and assessment experiences for the MBBS s tudent. Contents created 
bysubject experts have been curated to provide guidance for the curriculum planners, leaders and teachers in medical schools. The manual must be used withreference 
to and in the context of the Regulations. 
Section 1 
 
Competencies for the Indian Medical Graduate 
 
Section 1 - provides the Roles (global competencies) extracted from the Competency Based Medical Education (CBME) Guidelines, 2024. The global competencies 
identified asdefining the role s of the Indian Medical Graduate are the broad competencies that t he learner must aspire to achi eve, teachers and curriculum 
plannersmust ensure that the learning experiences are aligned to this Manual. 
Extract from the Competency Based Medical Education (CBME) Guidelines, 2024 
 
2. Objectives of the Indian Graduate Medical Training Programme  
 
The undergraduate medical education program is designed with a goal to create an "Indian Medical Graduate" (IMG) possessing re quisite knowledge, skills, 
attitudes, values and responsiveness, so that she or he may function appropriately and effectively as a physician of first contact of the community while being globally 
relevant. To achieve this, the following national and institutional goals for the learner of the Indian Medical Graduate training program are hereby advocated. The first 
contact physician needs to be skillful to perform duties of pri mary care physician and have requisite skills for promotive, pr eventative, rehabilitative, palliative care & 
referral services.

9  
2.1 National Goals 
 
At the end of undergraduate program, the Indian Medical Graduate should be able to: 
 
a. Recognize "health for all" as a national goal and health right of all citizens and by undergoing training for medical profession to fulfill his social obligations 
towards realization of this goal. 
b. Learn key aspects of National policies on health and devote himself to its practical implementation. 
 
c. Achieve competence in the practice of holistic medicine, encompassing promotive, preventive, curative and rehabilitative aspects of common diseases. 
 
d. Develop scientific temper, acquire educational experience for proficiency in profession and promote healthy living. 
 
e. Become an exemplary citizen by observance of medical ethics and fulfilling social and professional obligations, so as to respond to national aspirations. 
 
2.2 Institutional Goals 
 
In consonance with the national goals, each medical institution should evolve institutional goals to define the kind of trained manpower (or professionals) they 
intend to produce. The Indian Medical Graduates coming out of a medical institute should be competent in diagnosis and management of common health problems 
of the individual and the community, commensurate with his/her position as a member of the health team at the primary, secondary or tertiary levels, using his/her 
clinical skills based on history, physical examination and relevant investigations. 
a. Be competent for working in the health care team from Phase I MBBS to Compulsory rotatory medical internship (CRMI) in a gradual manner with 
increasing complexity in an integrated multi-department involvement. 
b. Be competent to practice prevent ive, promotive, curative, palli ative and rehabilitativeꞏ medicine in respect to the commonly e ncountered health problems. 
 
c. Appreciate rationale for diffe rent therapeutic modalities; be f amiliar with the administration of the "essential medicines" an d their common adverse  
 effects.

10  
d. Appreciate the socio-psychological, cultural, economic and envi ronmental factors affecting health and develop humane attitude towards the 
patients in discharging one's professional responsibilities. 
e. Possess the attitude for continued self-learning and to seek further expertise or to pursue research in any chosen area of medicine, action research 
and documentation skills. 
f. Be familiar with the basic factors which are essential for the implementation of the National Health Programs including practical aspects of the following: 
 
i. Family Welfare and Maternal and Child Health (MCH); 
 
ii. Sanitation and water supply; 
 
iii. Prevention and control of c ommunicable and non-communicable diseases; 
 
iv. Immunization; 
 
v. Health Education and advocacy; 
 
vi. Indian Public Health Standards  (IPHS) at various level of service delivery; 
 
vii. Bio-medical waste disposal; 
 
viii. Organizational and or institutional arrangements. 
 
g. Acquire basic management skills in the area of human resources,  materials and resource management related to health care deliv ery, general  
  and hospital management, principal inventory skills and counselling. 
h.   Be able to identify community health problems and learn to  work to resolve these by designing, instituting corrective ste ps and evaluating   
outcome of such measures with maximum community participation.

11  
 
i.  Be able to work as a leading partner in health care teams and acquire proficiency in communication skills. 
j.  Be competent to work in a variety of health care settings. 
k. Have personal characteristics and attitudes required for pro fessional life including personal integrity, sense of responsib ility, dependability, and ab ility torelate to or  
l. show concern for other individuals. 
All efforts must be made to equip the medical graduates to acqu ire certifiable skills as given in comprehensivelist of skills recommended as desirable for 
Bachelor of Medicine and Bachelor of Surgery (MBBS)Indian Medical Graduate, as given in theGraduate Medical Education Regulations. 
2.3 Goals for the Learner 
 
In order to fulfil these goals, the Indian Medical Graduate must be able to function in the following roles appropriately and effectively:- 
 
a. Clinician who understands and pr ovides preventive, promotive, curative, palliative and holistic care with compassion. 
 
b. Leader and member of the health  care team and system with capabilities to collect, analyse, synthesize and communicate health data appropriately. 
 
c. Communicate with patients, families, colleagues, community a nd community in a methodological and skillful way using various approaches in family 
visits, family adoption program, clinic-social cases, clinical cases and AETCOM training programs. 
d. Lifelong learner committed to  continuous improvement of skills and knowledge.

12  
e. Professional, who is committed to excellence, is ethical, re sponsive and accountable to patients, community, profession, and society. Training of 
humanities and social sciences will be useful for this training. 
3. Competency Based Training Programme of the Indian Medical Graduate 
Competency based learning would include designing and implement ing medical education. curriculum that focuses on the desired a nd observable activity in 
real life situations. In order t o effectively fulfill the roles , the Indian Medical Graduate would have obtained the following  set of competencies at the time of 
graduation: 
3.1 Clinician, who understands and provides preventive, promotive, curative, palliative and holistic care with compassion. 
 
3.1.1 Demonstrate knowledge of norma l human structure, function and d evelopment from a molecular, ce llular, biological, clinical, be havioral and social 
perspective. 
3.1.2 Demonstrate knowledge of abno rmal human structure, function and  development from a molecular, cellular, biological, clinical, behavioral and social 
perspective. 
3.1.3 Demonstrate knowledge of medico-legal, societal, ethical and humanitarian principles that influence healthcare. 
 
3.1.4 Demonstrate knowledge of nati onal and regional health care poli cies including the National Health Mission that incorporates Na tional Rural Health 
Mission (NRHM) and National Urban Health Mission (NUHM), frameworks, economics and systems that influence health promotion, health care delivery, 
disease prevention, effectiveness, responsiveness, quality and patient safety. 
3.1.5 Demonstrate ability to elicit and  record from the patient, and other relevant sources including relatives and caregivers, a hi story that is complete and 
relevant to disease identification, disease prevention and health promotion.

13  
3.1.6 Demonstrate ability to elicit and record from the patient, and other relevant sources. including  relatives and caregivers, a h istory that is contextual to 
gender, age, vulnerability, social and economic status, patient preferences, beliefs and values. 
3.1.7 Demonstrate ability to perform a physical examination that is complete and relevant to disease identification, disease prevention and health promotion. 
3.1.8 Demonstrate ability to perform a physical examination that is contextual to gender, social and economic status, patient preferences and values. 
 
3.1.9 Demonstrate effective clinical  problem solving, judgment and ab ility to interpret and integrate available data in order to add ress patient problems, 
generate differential diagnoses and develop individualized management plans that include preventive, promotive and therapeutic goals. 
3.1.10 Maintain accurate, clear and appropriate record of the patient in conformation with legal and administrative frameworks. 
 
3.1.11 Demonstrate ability to choose th e appropriate diagnostic tests and interpret these tests based on scientific validity, cost ef fectiveness and clinical 
context. 
3.1.12 Demonstrate ability to prescribe and safely administer appropri ate therapies including nutriti onal interventions, pharmacother apy and interventions 
based on the principles of rational drug therapy, scientific va lidity, evidence and cost that conform to established national and regional health 
programmes and policies for the following: 
a. Disease pr evention, 
 
b. Health promotion and cure, 
 
c. Pain and distress alleviation, and 
 
d. Rehabilitation and palliation.

14  
3.1.13 Demonstrate ability to provide a continuum of care at the primary (including home care) and/or secondary level that addresses chronicity, mental and 
physical disability, 
3.1.14 Demonstrate ability to appropriately identify and refer patients who may requireꞏ specialized or advanced tertiary care. 
 
3.1.15 Demonstrate familiarity with basic, clinical and translational research as it applies to the care of the patient. 
 
3.2 Leader and member of the health care team and system 
 
3.2.1 Work effectively and appropriately with colleagues in an inter-professional health care team respecting diversity of roles, responsibilities and 
competencies of other professionals. 
3.2.2 Recognize and function effectively, responsibly and appropriately as a health care team leader in primary and secondary health care settings. 
 
3.2.3 Educate and motivate other members of the team and work in a collaborative and collegial fashion that will help maximize the health care delivery 
potential of the team. 
3.2.4 Access and utilize components of the health care system and health delivery in a_ manner that is appropriate, cost effective, fair and in compliance 
with the national health care priorities and policies, as well as be able to collect, analyse and utilize health data. 
3.2.5 Participate appropriately and effectively in measures that will advance quality of health care and patient safety within the health care system. 
 
3.2.6 Recognize and advocate health. promotion, disease prevention and health care quality improvement through prevention and early recognition: in a) 
life style diseases and b) cancer, in collaboration with other members of the health care team. 
3.3 Communicator with patients, families, colleagues and community 
 
3.3.1 Demonstrate ability to communica te adequately, sensitively, eff ectively and respectfully with patients, families, colleagues a nd community in a

15  
language that patients, families, colleagues and community understands and in a manner that will improve patient patients, families, colleagues and 
community satisfaction and health care outcomes. 
3.3.2 Demonstrate ability to establish professional relationships wit h patients, families, colleagues and community that are positiv e, understanding, 
humane, ethical, empathetic, and trustworthy. 
3.3.3 Demonstrate ability to communicate with patients, families, colleagues and community in a manner respectful of patient’s preferences, values, prior 
experience, beliefs, confidentiality and privacy. 
3.3.4 Demonstrate ability to communicate with patients, colleagues and families in a manner that encourages participation and shared decision- making 
and overcoming hesitancy towards health initiatives. 
3.4 Lifelong learner committed to continuous improvement of skills and knowledge 
 
3.4.1 Demonstrate ability to perform an objective self-assessment of knowledge and skills, continue learning, refine existing skills and acquire new skills. 
 
3.4.2 Demonstrate ability to apply newly gained knowledge or skills to the care of the patient. 
 
3.4.3 Demonstrate ability to introspect and utilize experiences, to enhance personal and professional growth and learning. 
 
3.4.4 Demonstrate ability to search (including through electronic means), and critically re- evaluate the medical literature and apply the information in the 
care of the patient. 
3.4.5 Be able to identify and select an appropriate career pathway that is professionally rewarding and personally fulfilling. 
 
3.5 Professional who is committed to excellence, is ethical, responsive and accountable to patients, the profession and community. 
 
3.5.1 Practice selflessness, integrity, responsibility, accountability and respect.

16  
3.5.2 Respect and maintain professional boundaries between patients, colleagues and society. 
 
3.5.3 Demonstrate ability to recognize and manage ethical and professional conflicts. 
 
3.5.4 Abide by prescribed ethical and legal codes of conduct and practice. 
 
3.5.5 Demonstrate commitment to the growth of the medical profession as a whole. 
 
Section 2 
Subject-wise competencies 
 
Section 2 contains subject-wise competencies that must be achieved at the end of instruction in that subject. These are organised intables. 
 
Competencies (Outcomes) in each subject are grouped according to topics number-wise. It is important to review the individual competencies inthe light of the 
topic outcomes as a whole. For each competency outlined - the l earning domains (Knowledge, Skill, Attitude, Communication) are  identified.The expected level of 
achievement in that subject is identified as – [knows (K), know s how (KH), shows how (SH), perform (P)]. As a rule, ‘perform’i ndicates independent performance 
without supervision and is required rarely in the pre-internship period. The competency is a core (Y - must achieve) or anon-core (N - desirable) outcome. Suggested 
learning and assessment methods (these are suggestions) and exp lanation of the terms used are gi ven under thesection “definiti ons used in this document”. The 
suggested number of times a skill must be performed independently for certification in the learner’s logbook is also given. 
The number of topics and competencies in each subject are given below:

17  
Topics and competencies in Phase 1 & Phase 2 subjects (Volume I) 
 
Sr. No. Subjects Number of topics Number of 
competencies 
1. Anatomy 82 413 
2. Physiology 12 136 
3. Biochemistry 14 84 
4. Pharmacology 10 92 
5. Pathology 35 182 
6. Microbiology 11 74 
7. Forensic Medicine 14 158 
 
Total 178 1139

18  
 
 
Topics and competencies in Medicine and Allied subjects (Volume II) 
 
Sr. No. Subjects Number of topics Number of 
competencies 
1. Community Medicine 20 136 
2. General Medicine 29 525 
3. Paediatrics 35 406 
4. Psychiatry 13 17 
5. Dermatology, Venereology & Leprosy 15 48 
 Total 112 1132

19  
 
Topics and competencies in Surgery and Allied subjects (Volume III)  
 
Sr. No. Subjects Number of topics Number of 
competencies 
1. General Surgery 30 133 
2. Ophthalmology 10 60 
3. Otorhinolaryngology 04 63 
4. Obstetrics & Gynaecology 38 141 
5. Orthopaedics 14 40 
6. Anesthesiology 11 52 
7. Radiodiagnosis & Toxicology 07 21 
 
Total 114 510

20

21

22

23 
Definitions used in the Manual 
1. Goal: A projected state of affairs that a person or system plans to achieve. 
In other words: Where do you want to go? Or What do you want to become? 
2. Competency: The habitual and judicious use of communication, knowledge, technical skills, clinical reasoning, emotions, values, and  
                     Reflection in daily practice for the benefit of the individualand community being served. 
In other words: What should you have? Or What should have changed? 
3. Objective: Statement of what a learner should be able to do at the end of as pecific learning experience. In other words:  
What the Indian Medical Graduate should know, do, or behave. 
                                                                                                    Action        Verbs used in this manual 
 
Knowledge Skill Attitude/communicate 
Enumerate Identify Counsel 
List Demonstrate Inform 
Describe Perform und er supervision Demonstrate understanding of  
Discuss Perform independently Communicate
Differentiate Document  
Define Present  
Classify Record  
Choose Elicit  
Interpret   
Report

24 
Note: 
1. Specified essential competencies only will be required to be performed independently at the end of the final year MBBS. 
2. The word ‘perform’ or ‘do’ is used ONLY if the task has to be done on patients or in laboratory practical in the first/ second  phases. 
3. Most tasks that require performance during undergraduate years will be performed under supervision. 
4. If a certification to perform independently has been done, then the number of times the task has to be performed 
undersupervision will be indicated in the last column. 
Explanation of terms used in this manual 
 
LGT  (LGT) Any instructional la rge group method including interactive lecture 
SGT (SGT) Any instructional method involving small groups of students in an appropriate 
learning context 
DOAP (Demonstration-Observation- 
Assistance-Performance) 
A practical session that allows the student to observe a demonstration, assist the 
performer, perform in a simulated environment, perform under supervision or 
perform independently 
Skill assessment/ Direct observation A session that assesses the skill of the student including those in the practical 
laboratory, skills- lab,skills- station that uses mannequins /papercase/ simulated 
patients/ real patients as the context demands 
DOPS (Directly observed procedural 
skills) 
DOPS is a method of assessment for assessing competency of the students in 
which the examiner directly observes the student performing procedure 
Core A competency that is necessary in order to complete the requirements of the subject 
(traditional - must know) 
Non-Core A competency that is optional in order to complete the requirements of the 
subject (traditional- nice (good) to know/ desirable to know) 
National Guidelines Health programs as relevant to the competen cy that are part of the National Health  
Program

25 
 
Domains of learning  
K Knowledge 
S Skill 
A Attitude 
C Communication 
 
Levels of competency 
 
K Knows Aknowledge attribute-Usually enumerates or describes 
KH Knows how A higher level of knowledge-isabletodiscussoranaly ze 
SH Shows how A skill attribute: is able to interpret/ demonstrate a complex 
procedure requiring thought, knowledge and behavior 
P Performs (under 
supervision or 
independently) 
Mastery for the level of competence - When done 
independently under supervision a pre-specified numberof 
times 
- certification or capacity to perform independently results 
Note: 
In the table of competency - the highest level of competency ac quired is specified and implies th at the lower levels have been  acquired already. Therefore, 
when a student is able to SH - Show how- an informed consent is  obtained - it is presumed that the preceding steps - the knowl edge, the analytical skills, the 
skill of communicating have all been obtained. 
 
It may also be noted that attainment of the highest level of competency may be obtained through steps spread over several subjects or phases and not 
necessarily in the subject or the phase in which the competency has been identified.

26 
 
 
 
Volume II 
Competency based Undergraduate Curriculum 
in 
Medicine & Allied subjects

27  
 
 
 
 
 
COMMUNITY MEDICINE (CODE: CM)

28  
Number COMPETENCY 
The student should be able to 
Domain 
K/S/A/C 
Level K/KH/ 
SH/P 
Core 
Y/N 
Suggested Teaching 
learning methods 
Suggested 
Assessment methods 
Number 
required to 
certify P 
COMMUNITY MEDICINE(Topics:20 Competencies: 136) 
Topic 1: Concept of Health and Disease Number of competencies:( 10) Number of competencies that require certification :(NIL) 
CM1.1 Define and describe the concept of Public Health K K H Y LGT, SGT Written/Viva-voce  
CM1.2 Define health; describe the concept of holistic health including concept 
of spiritual health and the relativeness & determinants of health 
K K H Y LGT, SGT Written/Viva-voce  
CM1.3 Describe the characteristics of agent, host and environmental 
factors in health and disease an d the multifactorial etiology o f 
disease 
K K H Y LGT, SGT Written/Viva-voce  
CM1.4 Describe and discuss the natural history of disease K K H Y LGT, SGT Written/Vova voce  
CM1.5 Describe the application of interventions at various levels of prevention K K H Y LGT, SGT Written/Vova voce  
CM1.6 Describe and discuss the concepts, the principles of Health promotion 
and Education, IEC and Behavioral change communication (BCC) 
K K H Y LGT, SGT Written/viva-voce  
CM1.7 Enumerate and describe health indicators K K H Y LGT, SGT Written/Vova voce  
CM1.8 Describe the Demographic profile of India and discuss its Impact on 
health 
K K H Y LGT, SGT Written/Vova voce  
CM1.9 Demonstrate the role of effective Communication skills in health in a 
simulated environment 
S S H Y DOAP, FAP Clinical posting Skill assessment /OSCE  
CM1.10 Demonstrate the Important aspects of the doctor patient relationship 
in a simulated environment 
S S H Y DOAP, FAP Clinical posting Skill assessment /OSCE  
Topic 2: Relationship of social and behavioural to health and diseaseNumber of competencies:(5) Number of competencies that re quire certification:(2) 
CM2.1 Describe the steps and perform clinico socio-cultural and 
demographic assessment of the individual, family and 
community 
S S H Y LGT,SGT, DOAP FAP Clinical 
posting 
Written/Vova voce/ 
Skill assessment 
5

29  
Number COMPETENCY 
The student should be able to 
Domain 
K/S/A/C 
Level K/KH/ 
SH/P 
Core 
Y/N 
Suggested Teaching 
learning methods 
Suggested 
Assessment methods 
Number 
required to 
certify P 
CM2.2 Describe the socio-cultural factors, family (types), its role i n health 
anddisease&demonstrateinasimulatedenvironmentthecorrect 
assessment of socio-economic status 
S S H Y LGT,SGT, DOAP FAP Clinical 
posting 
Written/Vova voce/ 
Skill assessment /OSCE 
5 
CM2.3 Describe and demonstrate in a simulated environment the 
assessmentofbarrierstogoodhealthandhealthseekingbehavior 
S S H Y LGT,SGT, DOAP FAP Clinical 
posting 
Written/Vova voce/ 
Skill assessment /OSCE 
 
CM2.4 Describe social psychology, community behaviour and community 
relationship and their impact on health and disease 
K K H Y LGT,SGT,FAP Clinical posting Written/Vova voce  
CM2.5 Describepovertyandsocialsecuritymeasuresanditsrelationship to 
health and disease 
K K H Y LGT,SGT,FAP Clinical posting Written/Vova voce  
Topic 3: Environmental Health Problems Number of competencies:( 08) Number of competencies that  require certification:(NIL) 
CM3.1 Describe the health hazards of air, water, noise, radiation and p o l l u t i o n  K K H Y LGT,SGT FAP Clinical posting Written/Vova voce  
CM3.2 Describe concepts of safe and wholesome water, sanitary sources of 
water, water purification processes, water quality standards, 
concepts of water conservation and rainwater harvesting 
K K H Y LGT,SGT, DOAPFAP Clinical 
posting 
Written/Vova voce  
CM3.3 Describe the aetiology and basis of water borne diseases
/jaundice /hepatitis /diarrheal diseases 
K K H Y LGT,SGT, DOAPFAP Clinical 
posting 
Written/Vova voce  
CM3.4 Describe the concept of solid waste, human excreta and sewage disposal K K H Y LGT,SGT Written/Vova voce  
CM3.5 Describe the standards of housing and the effect of housing on health K K H Y LGT,SGT FAP Clinical posting Written/Vova voce  
CM3.6 Describe the role of vectors in the causation of diseases. Also discuss 
National Vector Borne disease Control Program 
K K H Y LGT,SGT FAP Clinical posting Written/Vova voce  
CM3.7 Identify and describe the identifying features and life cycles of vectors 
of Public Health Importance and their control measures 
S S H Y LGT,SGT, DOAPFAP Clinical 
posting 
Written/Vova voce/ 
Skill assessment/OSCE

30  
Number COMPETENCY 
The student should be able to 
Domain 
K/S/A/C 
Level K/KH/ 
SH/P 
Core 
Y/N 
Suggested Teaching 
learning methods 
Suggested 
Assessment methods 
Number 
required to 
certify P 
CM3.8 Describe the mode of action, application cycle of commonly 
used insecticides and rodenticides 
K K H Y LGT,SGT FAP Clinical 
posting 
Written/Vova voce  
Topic 4: Principles of health promotion and education Number of  competencies:(4) Number of comp etencies that require certification:(01) 
CM4.1 Describe various methods of health education with their advantages 
and limitations 
K K H Y LGT,SGT FAP Clinical posting Written/Vova voce  
CM4.2 Describe the methods of organizing health promotion and education 
and counselling activities at individual family and community settings 
K K H Y LGT,SGT FAP Clinical posting Written/Vova voce  
CM4.3 Demonstrate and describe the steps in evaluationof health promotion 
and education program 
S S H Y SGT, DOAPFAP Clinical 
posting 
Written/Vova voce/ 
Skill assessment /OSCE 
 
CM 4.4 Conduct a health education session for community awareness in a 
simulated environment/FAP/clinical posting 
S S H Y SGT, DOAPFAP Clinical 
posting 
Written/Vova voce/ 
Skill assessment /OSCE 
1 
Topic 5: Nutrition Numberofcompetencies:(22) Numberofcompetenci esthatrequire certification:(5) 
CM5.1 Describe the common sources of various nutrients and special 
nutritional requirements according to age, sex, activity, physiological 
Conditions 
K K H Y LGT,SGT FAP Clinical posting Written/Vova voce  
CM5.2 Describe and demonstrate the correct method of performing a 
nutritional assessmentof individuals, families andthecommunity by 
using the appropriate method 
S S H Y DOAP, FAP Clinical posting Skill assessment /OSCE  
CM5.3 Define and describe common nutrition related health disorders 
(includingmacro-PEM, Micro-iron, Zn, iodine, Vit.A), their control 
and management 
K K H Y LGT,SGT FAP Clinical 
posting 
Written/Vova voce  
CM5.4 Plan and recommend a suitable diet for the individuals and families 
based on local availability of foods and economic status, etc in a 
simulated environment 
S S H Y DOAP, FAP Clinical posting Skill assessment /OSCE

31  
Number COMPETENCY 
The student should be able to 
Domain 
K/S/A/C 
Level K/KH/ 
SH/P 
Core 
Y/N 
Suggested Teaching 
learning methods 
Suggested 
Assessment methods 
Number 
required to 
certify P 
CM5.5 Describe the methods of nutritional surveillance principles 
nutritional education and rehabilitation in the context of socio- 
cultural factors. 
K K H Y LGT,SGT FAP Clinical posting Written/Vova voce  
CM5.6 Enumerate and discuss  the National  Nutrition Policy, important 
national nutritional Programs including the Integrated Child 
Development Services Scheme (ICDS) etc 
K K H Y LGT,SGT FAP Clinical posting Written/Vova voce  
CM5.7 Describe food hygiene K K H Y LGT, SGT FAP Clinical 
posting 
Written/Vova voce FAP 
Clinical posting 
 
CM5.8 Describe and discuss the importance and methods of food 
fortification and effects of additives and adulteration 
K K H Y LGT, SGT FAP Clinical 
posting 
Written/Vova voce  
CM5.9 Perform nutritional assessment of individual, family and community 
using appropriate method and plan a diet for health promotion based 
on the assessment 
S S H Y LGT, SGT Written/Vova 
voce/OSCE 
5 
CM 5.10 Recommend a dietary plan for a person with DM/ HTN/ Obesity in a 
simulated environment/FAP/Clinical posting 
S S H Y LGT, SGT Written/Vova 
voce/OSCE 
5 
CM5.11 Plan a diet for an adult which meets the protein (macro nutrients) 
requirements as per latest RDA-NIN guidelines for vegetarian/ 
ovo-vegetarian/non-vegetarian 
S S H Y LGT, SGT Written/Vova 
voce/OSCE 
5 
CM5.12 Demonstrate different types of breastfeeding holds, latching, manual 
expression of breast milk using a baby model and breast model. 
S S H Y LGT, SGT Written/Vova 
voce/OSCE 
5 
CM 5.13 Counsel a mother about complementary feeding for different age 
groups of the child covering the 8 dietary diversity food groups, 
quantity, frequency, consistency of the food. 
S S H Y LGT, SGT Written/Vova 
voce/OSCE 
5 
CM 5.14 Demonstrate an awareness of their own personal health and nutrition S S H Y LGT, SGT Written/Vova 
voce/OSCE 
 
CM 5.15 Demonstrate knowledge of the role of nutrition in health promotion 
and disease prevention 
S S H Y LGT, SGT Written/Vova 
voce/OSCE 
 
CM 5.16 Have knowledge of breast feeding and complementary feeding 
Practices 
S S H Y LGT, SGT Written/Vova 
voce/OSCE

32  
Number COMPETENCY 
The student should be able to 
Domain 
K/S/A/C 
Level K/KH/ 
SH/P 
Core 
Y/N 
Suggested Teaching 
learning methods 
Suggested 
Assessment methods 
Number 
required to 
certify P 
CM 5.17 Ability to counsel mothers on breast feeding with focus on attachment 
to breast and correct position of the newborn 
S S H Y LGT, SGT Written/Vova 
voce/OSCE 
 
CM 5.18 Ability to counsel mothers on complementary feeding using National 
guidelines while being sensitive of cultural and socioeconomic 
influences 
S S H Y LGT, SGT Written/Vova 
voce/OSCE 
 
CM 5.19 Assess the nutritional content of processed foods learning to 
understand labels, and empower patients to make informed nutritional 
decisions. 
S S H Y LGT, SGT Written/Vova 
voce/OSCE 
 
CM 5.20 Counsel for diet modification for  a diabetic/ hypertensive/obese 
individual 
S S H Y LGT, SGT Written/Vova 
voce/OSCE 
 
CM 5.21 Plan and conduct a health education session on nutrition in NCD clinic / 
in community 
S S H Y LGT, SGT Written/Vova 
voce/OSCE 
 
CM 5.22 Counsel mother on breast feeding and complementary feeding S S H Y LGT, SGT Written/Vova 
voce/OSCE 
 
Topic 6: Basic statistics and its applications                          N u m b e r  o f  c o m p e t e n c i e s : ( 0 6 )                                                 N u m b e r  o f  c o m p e t e n c i e s  t h a t  r e q u i r e  c e r t i fication:(1) 
CM6.1 Formulate research question for a study K K H Y SGT, LGT, DOAP Written/Vova voce/ 
Skill assessment 
 
CM6.2 Describe and discuss the principles and demonstrate the methods 
of collection, classification, analysis, interpretation and 
presentation of statistical data 
S S H Y SGT, LGT, DOAP Written/Vova voce/ 
Skill assessment/OSCE 
 
CM6.3 Describe, discuss and demonstrate the application of elementary 
statistical methods including test of significance in various study 
designs 
S S H Y SGT, LGT, DOAP Written/Vova voce/ 
Skill assessment/OSCE 
 
CM6.4 Enumerate, discuss and demonstrate Common sampling 
techniques, simple statistical methods, frequency distribution, 
measures of central tendency and dispersion 
S S H Y SGT, LGT, DOAP Written/Vova voce/ 
Skill assessment/OSCE 
 
CM 6.5 Able to understand use of statistical software for the data analysis S S H Y LGT, SGT Written/Vova 
voce/OSCE 
 
CM 6.6 Perform descriptive statistics of a given data-set and interpret S S H Y LGT, SGT Written/Vova 
voce/OSCE 
5

33  
Number COMPETENCY 
The student should be able to 
Domain 
K/S/A/C 
Level K/KH/ 
SH/P 
Core 
Y/N 
Suggested Teaching 
learning methods 
Suggested 
Assessment methods 
Number 
required to 
certify P 
Topic 7: Epidemiology       Number of competencies:(11)                                                       Number of competencies that require certification: (01) 
CM7.1 Define Epidemiology and describe and enumerate the principles, 
concepts and uses 
K K H Y SGT, LGT Written/Vova voce  
CM7.2 Enumerate, describe and discuss the modes of transmission and 
measures for prevention and control of communicable and non- 
communicable diseases 
K K H Y SGT, LGT Written/Vova voce  
CM7.3 Enumerate, describe and discuss the sources of epidemiological data K K H Y SGT, LGT Written/Vova voce  
CM7.4 Define, calculate and interpret morbidity andmortality indicators based 
on given set of data 
S S H Y SGT,DOAP Written/Skill 
assessment, OSCE 
5 
CM7.5 Enumerate, define, describe anddiscuss epidemiologicalstudy designs K K H Y SGT, LGT Written/Vova voce  
CM7.6 Enumerate and evaluate  the need ofscreening tests S S H Y SGT,DOAP Written/Skill 
Assessment 
 
CM7.7 Describe and demonstrate the steps in the Investigation of an 
epidemic  of communicable diseaseand describethe principles of 
control measures 
S S H Y SGT,DOAP Written/Skill 
assessment 
/OSCE 
 
CM7.8 Describe the principles ofassociation, causation and biases in 
epidemiological studies 
K K H Y SGT, LGT Written/Vova voce  
CM7.9 Describe and demonstrate the application of computers in epidemiology S K H Y SGT,DOAP Written  
CM 7.10 Able to demonstrate development of research proposal S S H Y LGT, SGT Written/Vova 
voce/OSCE 
 
CM 7.11 Able to demonstrate the skills for critically appraise the research 
articles or research data 
S S H Y LGT, SGT Written/Vova 
voce/OSCE 
 
Topic 8: Epidemiologyof communicable and non- communicable diseases Number ofcompetencies:(07) Number of competencies that req uire certification:(NIL) 
CM8.1 Describe and discuss the epidemiological and control measures 
including the use of essential laboratory tests atthe primary care level 
for communicable diseases 
K K H Y SGT, LGT FAP Clinical 
posting 
Written/Vova voce

34  
Number COMPETENCY 
The student should be able to 
Domain 
K/S/A/C 
Level K/KH/ 
SH/P 
Core 
Y/N 
Suggested Teaching 
learning methods 
Suggested 
Assessment methods 
Number 
required to 
certify P 
CM8.2 Describe and discuss the epidemiological and control measures 
including the use of essential laboratory tests at theprimary care level 
for Non-Communicable diseases (diabetes, Hypertension, Stroke, 
obesity and cancer etc.) 
K K H Y SGT, LGT FAP Clinical 
posting 
Written/Vova voce  
CM8.3 Enumerate and describedisease specific National Health Programs 
including their prevention and treatment of a case 
K K H Y SGT, LGT FAP Clinical 
posting 
Written/Vova voce  
CM8.4 Describe the principles and enumerate the measures to control a 
disease epidemic 
K K H Y SGT, LGT FAP Clinical 
posting 
Written/Vova voce  
CM8.5 Describe and discuss the principles of planning, Implementing and 
evaluating control measures for disease at community level bearing in 
mind the public health importance of the disease 
K K H Y SGT, LGT FAP Clinical 
posting 
Written/Vova voce  
CM8.6 Educate and train health workers in disease surveillance, control & 
treatment and health education 
S S H Y DOAP FAP Clinical posting Skill assessment /OSCE  
CM8.7 Describe the principles of management of information systems K K H Y SGT, LGT FAP Clinical 
posting 
Written/Vova voce  
Topic 9: Demography andvital statistics Number ofcompetencies:( 07) Number of competencies that require certification:(NIL) 
CM9.1 Define  and describe the principles of Demography, Demographic cycle, 
Vital statistics 
K K H Y SGT, LGT Written/Vova voce  
CM9.2 Define, calculate and interpret demographic indices including birth rate, 
death rate, fertility rates 
S S H Y LGT,SGT, DOAP Skill assessment /OSCE  
CM9.3 Enumerate and describe the causes of declining sex-ratio and its social 
and health Implications 
K K H Y SGT, LGT Written/Vova voce  
CM9.4 Enumerate and describe the causes and consequences of population 
explosion and population dynamics of India. 
K K H Y SGT, LGT Written/Vova voce  
CM9.5 Describe the methods of population control K K H Y SGT, LGT Written/Vova voce

35  
Number COMPETENCY 
The student should be able to 
Domain 
K/S/A/C 
Level K/KH/ 
SH/P 
Core 
Y/N 
Suggested Teaching 
learning methods 
Suggested 
Assessment methods 
Number 
required to 
certify P 
CM9.6 Describe theNational PopulationPolicy K K H Y SGT, LGT Written/Vova voce  
CM9.7 Enumerate the sources of vital statistics including census, SRS, 
NFHS, NSSO etc 
K K H Y SGT, LGT Written/Vova voce  
Topic 10: Reproductive maternal and child health Number ofcompe tencies:(10) Number of competencies that require certification:(NIL) 
CM10.1 Describe thecurrentstatus of Reproductive, maternal, newborn 
and Child Health 
K K H Y SGT, LGT FAP Clinical 
posting 
Written/Vova voce  
CM10.2 Enumerate and describe the methods of screening high-risk groups and 
common health problems 
K K H Y SGT, LGT FAP Clinical 
posting 
Written/Vova voce  
CM10.3 Describe local customs and practices during pregnancy, child birth, 
lactation and child feeding practices 
K K H Y SGT, LGT FAP Clinical 
posting 
Written/Vova voce  
CM10.4 Describe thereproductive, maternal, newborn &child health (RMCH); 
child survival and safe motherhood interventions 
K K H Y SGT, LGT FAP Clinical 
posting 
Written/Vova voce  
CM10.5 Describe Universal Immunization Program; Integrated Management of 
Neonatal and Childhood Illness (GMNCI) and other existing Programs. 
K K H Y SGT, LGT FAP Clinical 
posting 
Written/Vova voce  
CM10.6 Enumerate and describe various family planning methods, their 
advantages and shortcomings 
K K H Y SGT, LGT FAP Clinical 
posting 
Written/Vova voce  
CM10.7 Enumerate and describe the basis and principles of the Family Welfare 
Program including the organization, technical and operational aspects 
K K H Y SGT, LGT FAP Clinical 
posting 
Written/Vova voce  
CM10.8 Describe the physiology, clinical management and principles of 
adolescent health including ARSH 
K K H Y SGT, LGT FAP Clinical 
posting 
Written/Vova voce FAP 
Clinical posting 
 
CM10.9 Describe and discuss gender issues and women empowerment K K H Y SGT, LGT FAP Clinical 
posting 
Written/Vova voce  
CM 10.10 Able to manage the health care services for reproductive and childcare 
services under supervision 
S S H Y LGT, SGT Written/Vova 
voce/OSCE 
 
Topic 11:  Occupational Health                                               Number ofcompetencies:(06)                                                    Number of competenciesthat requirecertification:(NIL) 
CM11.1 Enumerate and describe the presenting features of patients with 
occupational illness including agriculture 
K K H Y SGT, LGT Written/Vova voce

36  
Number COMPETENCY 
The student should be able to 
Domain 
K/S/A/C 
Level K/KH/ 
SH/P 
Core 
Y/N 
Suggested Teaching 
learning methods 
Suggested 
Assessment methods 
Number 
required to 
certify P 
CM11.2 Describe the role, benefits and functioning of the employees state 
insurance scheme 
K K H Y SGT, LGT Written/Vova voce  
CM11.3 Enumerate and describe specific occupational health hazards, their risk 
factors and preventive measures 
K K H Y SGT, LGT Written/Vova voce  
CM11.4 Describe the principles of  ergonomics in health preservation K K H Y SGT, LGT Written/Vova voce  
CM11.5 Describe occupational disorders of health professionals and their 
prevention & management 
K K H Y SGT, LGT Written/Vova voce  
CM 11.6 Able to manage the occupational health services at factory or industry 
level in a simulated environment 
S S H Y LGT, SGT Written/Vova 
voce/OSCE 
 
Topic 12: Geriatric services Number ofcompetencies:(05) Number of competencies that require certification:(NIL) 
CM12.1 Define and describe the concept of Geriatric services K K H Y LGT,SGT FAP Clinical posting Written/Vova voce  
CM12.2 Describe health problems of aged population K K H Y LGT,SGT FAP Clinical posting Written/Vova voce  
CM12.3 Describe the prevention of health problems of aged population K K H Y LGT,SGT FAP Clinical posting Written/Vova voce  
CM12.4 Describe National program for elderly K K H Y LGT,SGT Written/Vova voce  
CM 12.5 Able to identify the health needs to elderly individuals at the earliest S S H Y LGT, SGT FAP Clinical 
posting 
Written/Vova 
voce/OSCE 
 
Topic 13:                            Disaster Management Number of competencies:(05) Number of competencies that require certi fication:(NIL) 
CM13.1 Define and describe the  concept of Disaster management K K H Y LGT,SGT Written/Vova voce  
CM13.2 Describe disaster management cycle K K H Y LGT,SGT Written/Vova voce  
CM13.3 Describe man-made disasters in terworld And in India K K H Y LGT,SGT Written/Vova voce  
CM13.4 Describe  the details ofthe National Disaster management Authority K K H Y LGT, SGT Written/Vova voce  
CM 13.5 Able to understand the management of handing a disaster in a 
simulated environment 
S S H Y LGT, SGT Written/Vova 
voce/OSCE

37  
Number COMPETENCY 
The student should be able to 
Domain 
K/S/A/C 
Level K/KH/ 
SH/P 
Core 
Y/N 
Suggested Teaching 
learning methods 
Suggested 
Assessment methods 
Number 
required to 
certify P 
Topic 14: Hospitalwaste management Number ofcompetencies:(04) Number of competencies that require certification:(NIL) 
CM14.1 Define and classify hospital waste K K H Y LGT,SGT, visit to hospital Written/Vova voce  
CM14.2 Describe various methods of treatment of hospital waste K K H Y LGT,SGT,visit to hospital Written/Vova voce  
CM14.3 Describe  laws related to hospital waste management K K H Y LGT, SGT Written/Vova voce  
CM 14.4 Able to segregate the various hospital waste S S H Y LGT, SGT Written/Vova 
voce/OSCE 
 
Topic 15: Mental Health                                             Number of competencies:(04)                                      Number of competencies that require certification: (NIL) 
CM15.1 Define and describe the concept of mental Health K K H Y LGT,SGT FAP Clinical posting Written/Vova voce  
CM15.2 Describe warning signals of mental health disorder K K H Y LGT,SGT FAP Clinical posting Written/Vova voce  
CM15.3 Describe National Mental Health program K K H Y LGT,SGT FAP Clinical posting Written/Vova voce  
CM 15.4 Able to recognise the mental issues among individuals, families and 
communities at the earlier stages 
S S H Y LGT, SGT FAP Clinical 
posting 
Written/Vova 
voce/OSCE 
 
Topic 16: Health planning and management Number of competencies :(05) Number of competencies that require certification:(NIL) 
CM16.1 Define anddescribe theconcept ofHealthplanning K K H Y LGT,SGT Written/Vova voce  
CM16.2 Describeplanningcycle K K H Y LGT,SGT Written/Vova voce  
CM16.3 Describe Healthmanagement techniques K K H Y LGT,SGT Written/Vova voce  
CM16.4 Describe health planning in India and National policies related to 
health and health planning 
K K H Y LGT, SGT Written/Vova voce  
CM 16.5 Demonstrate understanding of concepts of Health planning in India, 
various health care economics analysis 
S S H Y LGT, SGT Written/Vova 
voce/OSCE 
 
Topic 17: Health care of the community                Number of competencies:(06)                Number of competenci es that require certification: (NIL) 
CM17.1 Define and describe the concept of health care to community K K H Y LGT,SGT Written/Vova voce  
CM17.2 Describe community diagnosis K K H Y LGT,SGT Written/Vova voce

38  
Number COMPETENCY 
The student should be able to 
Domain 
K/S/A/C 
Level K/KH/ 
SH/P 
Core 
Y/N 
Suggested Teaching 
learning methods 
Suggested 
Assessment methods 
Number 
required to 
certify P 
CM17.3 Describe primary health care, its components and principles K K H Y LGT,SGT Written/Vova voce  
CM17.4 Describe National policies related to health and health planning and 
millennium development goals 
K K H Y LGT,SGT Written/Vova voce  
CM17.5 Describe healthcare delivery in India K K H Y LGT,SGT Written/Vova voce  
CM 17.6 Demonstrate understanding of health system functioning in India S S H Y LGT, SGT, FAP Clinical 
posting 
Written/Vova 
voce/OSCE 
 
Topic 18: International Health Number of competencies:(3) Numbe r of competencies that require certification (NIL) 
CM18.1 Define and describe the concept of International health K K H Y LGT,SGT Written/Vova voce  
CM18.2 Describe roles of various international health agencies K K H Y LGT,SGT Written/Vova voce  
CM 18.3 Demonstrate understanding role of various international and national 
agencies in health & disease with prevention of emergence and re- 
emergence of diseases and prevention of pandemic and handling the 
Pandemic 
S S H Y LGT, SGT Written/Vova 
voce/OSCE 
 
Topic 19: Essential Medicine                             Number  of  competencies:(04)                                     Numb er of competencies that require certification:(NIL) 
CM19.1 Define and describe the concept of Essential Medicine List (EML) K K H Y LGT,SGT Written/Vova voce  
CM19.2 Describe roles of essentia l medicine in primary health care K K H Y LGT,SGT Written/Vova voce  
CM19.3 Describe counterfeit medicine and its prevention K K H Y LGT, SGT Written/Vova voce  
CM19.4 Demonstrate understanding of mechanism of identifying and calculation
of requirements of various medicines and essential medicine at primary
health care 
S S H Y LGT, SGT FAP Clinical posting Written/Vova 
voce/OSCE 
 
Topic 20:                Recent advances in Community Medicine                   Number of competencies:(04)        Number of competencies that require certification:(NIL) 
CM20.1 List Important public health events of last five years K K H Y LGT, SGT Written/Vova voce  
CM20.2 Describe various issues during outbreaks and their prevention K K H Y LGT, SGT Written/Vova voce  
CM 20.3 Describe any event imp ortant to Health of the Community K K H Y LGT, SGT Written/Vova voce  
CM 20.4 Demonstrate awareness about laws pertaining to practice of 
community medicine 
K K H Y LGT, SGT Written/Vova voce

39  
 
 
 
 
 
 
GENERAL MEDICINE (CODE: GM)

40  
 
Number COMPETENCY 
The student should be able to 
Predominant 
Domain 
K/S/A/C 
Level 
K/KH/S 
H/P 
Core 
(Y/N) 
Suggested Teaching 
Learning method 
Suggested 
Assessment 
method 
Number 
required 
to certify 
P 
GENERAL MEDICINE  (Topics=29,Competencies=525) 
Topic 1: Heart failureNumber of competencies: (27) Number of co mpetencies that require certification : ( 3) 
GM 1.1 Describe and discuss the epidemiology, genetic basis ,pathogenesis 
c l i n i c a l  e v o l u t i o n  a n d  c o u r s e  o f  c o m m o n  c a u s e s  o f  h e a r t  d i s e a s e 
including: rheumatic/ valvular, ischemic, hypertrophic inflammatory 
K KH Y LGT / SGT Application based 
question/ Viva voice 
 
GM 1.2 Describe and discuss the aetiolog y, microbiology, pathogenesis 
Clinical evolution, criteria, recognition and management of 
rheumatic fever,  and rheumatic valvular heart disease, penicil lin 
prophylaxis and its complications including infective endocarditis 
K KH Y LGT / SGT Application based 
question/ Viva voice 
 
GM 1.3 Define and Stage heart failure K KH Y LGT / SGT Applicat ion based 
question/ Viva voice 
 
GM 1.4 Describe, discuss, and differentiate the processes involved in Right 
Vs Left heart failure, systolic vs diastolic failure 
K KH Y LGT / SGT Application based 
question/ Viva voice 
 
GM 1.5 Describe and discuss the compen satory mechanisms involved in 
heart failure including cardiac remodelling and neurohormonal 
adaptations 
K KH Y LGT / SGT Application based 
question/ Viva voice 
 
GM 1.6 Enumerate, describe and discuss the factors that exacerbate heart 
failure including ischemia, arrhythmias, anaemia, thyrotoxicosi s, 
dietary factors drugs etc. 
K KH Y LGT / SGT Application based 
question/ Viva voice 
 
GM 1.7 Describe and discuss the pathogenesis and development of  
common arrhythmias involved in heart failure particularly atria l 
fibrillation 
K KH Y LGT / SGT Application based 
question/ Viva voice 
 
GM 1.8 Elicit document and present an appropriate history that will establish 
the diagnosis, cause and severity of heart failure including: 
presenting complaints, precipitating and exacerbating factors, risk 
factors exercise tolerance, changes in sleep patterns, features  
suggestive of infective endocarditis 
S SH Y Bedside clinic Long case 
/Short case 
Skill assessment 
OSCE 
 
GM 1.9 Perform and demonstrate a systematic examination based o n the 
history that will help establish the diagnosis and Estimate its  
S SH Y Bed side clinic, DOAP Long case /Short 
case

41  
Number COMPETENCY 
The student should be able to 
Predominant 
Domain 
K/S/A/C 
Level 
K/KH/S 
H/P 
Core 
(Y/N) 
Suggested Teaching 
Learning method 
Suggested 
Assessment 
method 
Number 
required 
to certify 
P 
 severity including: measurement of pulse, blood pressure and 
respiratory rate, jugular venous pulses, peripheral pulses, 
conjunctiva and fundus, lung, cardiac examination including 
palpation and auscultation with identification of heart sounds and 
murmurs, abdominal distension and splenic palpation 
    Skill assessment 
OSCE 
 
GM 1.10 Demonstrate peripheral pulse, volume, character, quality and 
variation in various causes of heart failure 
S SH Y Bed side clinic, 
DOAP 
Long case / Short 
case, Skill 
assessment, OSCE 
 
GM 1.11 Measure the blood pressure accurately, recognise and discuss 
alterations in blood pressure in valvular heart disease and oth er 
causes of heart failure and cardiac tamponade 
S SH Y Bed side clinic, 
DOAP 
Long case /Short 
case, Skill 
assessment, OSCE 
 
GM 1.12 Demonstrate and measure jugular venous distension S SH Y Bed side clinic, 
DOAP 
Long case /Short 
case, Skill 
assessment, OSCE 
3 
GM 1.13 Identify and describe the Timing, pitch quality conduction and 
significance of precordial murmurs ,their variations , use of 
dynamic auscultation 
S SH Y Bed side clinic, 
DOAP 
Long case /Short 
case, Skill 
assessment, OSCE 
3 
GM 1.14 Generate a differential diagnosis based on the clinical  presentation 
of various heart diseases and prioritise it based on the most likely 
diagnosis 
S SH Y Bed side clinic, 
DOAP 
Long case /Short 
case, Skill 
assessment, OSCE 
 
GM 1.15 Order and interpret diagnostic testing based on the clinical 
diagnosis including 12 lead ECG, Chest radiograph, blood cultures 
S SH Y Bed side clinic, 
DOAP 
Long case /Short 
case, Skill 
assessment, OSCE 
 
GM 1.16 Perform and interpret a 12 lead ECG S SH Y Bed side cli nic DOAP Skill assessment 
OSCE 
 
GM 1.17 Enumerate the indications for and describe the findings of hear t 
failure with the following investigations including: 2D 
echocardiography,  brain  natriuretic  peptide,  exercise  test ing, 
nuclear medicine testing and coronary angiogram 
K KH N LGT, 
SGT, 
Bed side clinic 
Application based 
question/ 
Viva voice 
 
GM 1.18 Discuss the severity of valvular heart disease based on the clinical 
and laboratory and Imaging features and describe the level of 
intervention required including surgery 
K 
S 
KH/ 
SH 
Y LGT, 
SGT, 
Bed side clinic 
Application based 
question, 
Long case /short

42  
Number COMPETENCY 
The student should be able to 
Predominant 
Domain 
K/S/A/C 
Level 
K/KH/S 
H/P 
Core 
(Y/N) 
Suggested Teaching 
Learning method 
Suggested 
Assessment 
method 
Number 
required 
to certify 
P 
      case,Skill 
assessment, OSCE 
Viva voce 
 
GM 1.19 Describe and discuss and identify the clinical features of acut e and 
sub-acute endocarditis, echocardiographic findings, blood cultu re 
and sensitivity and therapy 
K 
S 
KH/ 
SH 
Y LGT, 
SGT, 
Bed side clinic 
Application based 
question, 
Long case /short 
case, Skill 
assessment, OSCE, 
Viva voce 
 
GM 1.20 Assist and demonstrate the proper technique in collecti ng specimen 
for blood culture 
S SH Y DOAP 
Skills lab 
Skill assessment 
OSCE 
 
GM 1.21 Describe, prescribe and communicate non pharmacologic 
management of heart failure including sodium restriction, physi cal 
activity and limitations 
K 
S/C 
K 
SH 
Y LGT, 
SGT, 
 
Role play 
Application based 
question, 
Skill assessment 
OSCE 
 
GM 1.22 Describe and discuss the pharmacology of drugs including 
i n d i c a t i o n s ,  c o n t r a i n d i c a t i o n s  i n  t h e  m a n a g e m e n t  o f  h e a r t  f a i l ure 
including diuretics, ACE inhibitors, Beta blockers, aldosterone 
antagonists and cardiac glycosides 
K KH  LGT, 
SGT 
Application based 
question, 
/Viva voce 
 
GM 1.23 Enumerate the indications for val vuloplasty, valvotomy, coronar y 
revascularization and cardiac transplantation 
K KH Y LGT, 
SGT, 
Bedside clinic 
Application based 
question,/Viva 
 
GM 1.24 Develop document and present a management plan for pati ents 
with heart failure based on type of failure, underlying aetiology 
S SH Y SGT, 
Bedside clinic 
Application based 
question, 
Long case /Short 
case, Skill 
assessment, OSCE 
 
GM 1.25 Enumerate the causes of adult presentations of congenital heart  
disease and describe the distinguishing features between cyanot ic 
and acyanotic heart disease 
K KH Y SGT, 
Bedside clinic 
Application based 
question 
Viva voce 
 
GM 1.26 Elicit document and present an appropriate history, demonstrate  
correctly  general  examination,  relevant  clinical  findings  and 
 
S 
 
SH 
 SGT, 
Bedside clinic 
Long case /Short 
case

43  
Number COMPETENCY 
The student should be able to 
Predominant 
Domain 
K/S/A/C 
Level 
K/KH/S 
H/P 
Core 
(Y/N) 
Suggested Teaching 
Learning method 
Suggested 
Assessment 
method 
Number 
required 
to certify 
P 
 formulate document and present a management plan for an adult 
patient presenting with a common form of congenital heart disease 
    Skill assessment 
OSCE, Viva voce 
 
GM 1.27 Administer an intramuscular in jection with an appropriate 
communication to the patient 
S SH Y Bedside clinic 
Skills lab 
Skill assessment 
OSCE 
Log book 
2 
Topic 2: Acute Myocardial Infarction / IHD                                                Number of competencies: (24)           Number of competencies that require certification : ( 03) 
GM 2.1 Discuss and describe the epidemiology, antecedents and r isk 
factors for atherosclerosis and ischemic heart disease 
K KH Y LGT / SGT Application based 
question /Viva voce 
 
GM 2.2 Discuss the aetiology of risk factors both modifiable an d non 
modifiable of atherosclerosis and IHD 
K KH Y LGT / SGT Application based 
question /Viva voce 
 
GM 2.3 Discuss and describe the lipid cycle and the role of dys lipidemia in 
the pathogenesis of atherosclerosis 
K KH Y LGT / SGT Application based 
question /Viva voce 
 
GM 2.4 Discuss and describe the pathogenesis natural history, evolution 
and complications of atherosclerosis and IHD 
K KH Y LGT / SGT Application based 
question /Viva voce 
 
GM 2.5 Define the various acute coronary syndromes and describe  their 
evolution, natural history and outcomes 
K KH Y LGT / SGT Application based 
question /Viva voce 
 
GM 2.6 Elicit document and present an appropriate history that includes 
onset evolution, presentation risk factors, family history, comorbid 
conditions, complications, medication, history of atherosclerosis, 
IHD and coronary syndromes 
S SH Y Bedside clinic/DOAP Skill assessment  
GM 2.7 Perform, demonstrate and document a physical examination  
including a vascular and cardiac examination that is appropriate for 
the clinical presentation 
S SH Y Bedside clinic/DOAP Skill assessment  
GM 2.8 Generate document and present a differential diagnosis based on 
the clinical presentation and prioritise based on “cannot miss”, most 
likely diagnosis and severity 
S SH y SGT/Bedside clinic Skill assessment  
GM 2.9 Distinguish and differentiate between stable and unstable angina 
and AMI based on the clinical presentation 
S SH y Bedside clinic/DOAP Skill assessment  
GM 2.10 Order, perform and interpret an ECG S SH y Bedside clin ic/DOAP Skill assessment 3 
GM 2.11 Order and interpret a Chest X-ray and markers of acute myocardial S SH  Bedside clinic/DOAP Skill assessment 3

44  
Number COMPETENCY 
The student should be able to 
Predominant 
Domain 
K/S/A/C 
Level 
K/KH/S 
H/P 
Core 
(Y/N) 
Suggested Teaching 
Learning method 
Suggested 
Assessment 
method 
Number 
required 
to certify 
P 
 Infarction       
GM 2.12 Choose and interpret a lipid profile and identify the d esirable lipid 
profile in the clinical context 
S SH  Bedside clinic/DOAP Skill assessment  
GM 2.13 Discuss and enumerate the indications for and findings on 
echocardiogram, stress testing and coronary angiogram 
K KH Y LGT / SGT Written/Viva voce  
GM 2.14 Discuss and describe the indications for admission to a coronary 
care unit and supportive therapy for a patient with acute coronary 
Syndrome 
K KH Y LGT / SGT Written/Viva voce  
GM 2.15 Discuss and describe the medications used in patients w ith an 
acute coronary syndrome based on the clinical presentation 
K KH Y LGT / SGT Written/Viva voce  
GM 2.16 Discuss and describe the indications for acute thrombol ysis, PTCA 
and CABG 
K KH Y LGT / SGT Written/Viva voce  
GM 2.17 Discuss and describe the indications and methods of car diac 
Rehabilitation 
K KH Y LGT / SGT Written/Viva voce  
GM 2.18 Discuss and describe the indications, formulations, doses, side 
effects and monitoring for drugs used in the management of 
Dyslipidemia 
K KH Y LGT / SGT Written/Viva voce  
GM 2.19 Discuss and describe the pathogenesis, recognition and 
management of complications of acute coronary syndromes 
including arrhythmias, shock, LV dysfunction, papillary muscle 
rupture and pericarditis 
K KH Y LGT / SGT Written/Viva voce  
GM 2.20 Discuss and describe t he assessment and relief of pain in acute 
coronary syndromes 
K KH Y LGT / SGT Written/Viva voce  
GM 2.21 Observe and participate in a controlled environment of ACLS 
Program 
S SH Y DOAP Skill assessment  
GM 2.22 Perform and demonstrate in a mannequin BLS S P Y DOAP S kill 
assessment(WPBA) 
3 
GM 2.23 Describe and discuss the indications for nitrates, anti-platelet 
agents, gpIIb IIIa inhibitors, beta blockers, ACE inhibitors etc in the 
management of coronary syndromes 
K KH Y LGT / SGT Written /Viva  
GM 2.24 Counsel and communicate to patients with empathy lifest yle C/A SH Y DOAP,Role play Skill

45  
Number COMPETENCY 
The student should be able to 
Predominant 
Domain 
K/S/A/C 
Level 
K/KH/S 
H/P 
Core 
(Y/N) 
Suggested Teaching 
Learning method 
Suggested 
Assessment 
method 
Number 
required 
to certify 
P 
 changes in atherosclerosis / post coronary syndromes     assessment(WPBA)  
Topic 3: Pneumonia                                                           Number of competencies: (22)                 Numb er of competencies that require certification : ( 04) 
GM3.1 Define, discuss, describe and distinguish community acqui red 
pneumonia nosocomial pneumonia and aspiration pneumonia. 
K KH Y LGT, SGT Application  Based 
Questions /  Viva 
voce 
 
GM3.2 Discuss and describe the aetiologies of various kinds of pneumonia 
and their microbiology depending on the setting and Immune status 
of the host 
K KH Y LGT, SGT Application  Based 
Questions /  Viva 
voce 
 
GM3.3 Discuss and describe the pathogenesis, presentation, natural history 
and complications of pneumonia 
K KH Y LGT, SGT Application Based 
Questions / Viva 
voce 
 
GM3.4 Elicit document and present an appropriate history including th e 
evolution, risk factors including Immune status and occupationa l 
Risk 
S SH Y Bedside clinic, DOAP Long/short 
case/OSCE 
 
GM3.5 Perform, document and demonstrate a physical examination 
including general examination an d appropriate examination of th e 
lungs that establishes the diagnosis, complications and severit y of 
Disease 
S SH Y Bedside clinic, DOAP Long/short 
case/OSCE 
3 
GM3.6 Generate document and present a differential diagnosis based on  
the clinical features, and prioritize the diagnosis based on th e 
Presentation 
K KH Y Bedside clinic, DOAP Long/short case  
GM3.7 Order and interpret diagnostic tests based on the clinica l 
presentation including: CBC, Chest X ray PA view, Mantoux, sputum 
gram stain, sputum culture and sensitivity, pleural fluid examination 
and culture, HIV testing and ABG 
S SH Y Bedside clinic, DOAP, 
Tutorial 
Skill assessment 
OSCE/ viva Voce 
 
GM3.8 Demonstrate on a mannequin, correct technique of collection of 
blood sample for an arterial blood gas examination 
S SH Y DOAP Skill assessment 
OSCE 
 
GM3.9 Interpret results of arterial blood gas examination repor t K KH Y Bedside clinic, 
SGT 
Viva voce 2 
GM3.10 Demonstrate on a mannequin, correct technique of pleural  fluid 
Aspiration 
S SH Y DOAP Skill assessment 
OSCE

46  
Number COMPETENCY 
The student should be able to 
Predominant 
Domain 
K/S/A/C 
Level 
K/KH/S 
H/P 
Core 
(Y/N) 
Suggested Teaching 
Learning method 
Suggested 
Assessment 
method 
Number 
required 
to certify 
P 
GM3.11 Outline the correct tests that require to be performed and interpret 
results of pleural fluid aspiration report 
K 
S 
KH 
SH 
Y Bedside clinic, 
SGT 
Skill assessment 
OSCE 
Viva voce 
2 
GM3.12 Demonstrate on a mannequin, the correct technique of col lection 
of blood for culture 
S SH Y DOAP, Skill assessment 
OSCE 
 
GM 3.13 Interpret results of blood culture report. K KH Y Bedside clinic, 
SGT 
Viva voce  
GM3.14 Describe and enumerate the indications for further testi ng including 
HRCT, Viral cultures, PCR and specialized testing 
 
K 
 
KH 
Y Bedside clinic, Tutorial Viva voce  
GM3.15 Select, describe and pres cribe based on the most likely aetiology, an 
appropriate empirical antimicrobial based on the pharmacology and 
ant Microbial spectrum 
S SH Y Bedside clinic, 
Tutorial 
OSCE 
Viva voce 
2 
GM3.16 Select, describe and prescribe based on culture and sensitivity  
appropriate empirical Antimicrobial based on the pharmacology 
and antimicrobial spectrum. 
S SH Y Bedside clinic, 
 
SGT 
OSCE 
Viva voce 
 
GM3.17 Describe and enumerate the indications for hospitalization in 
patients with pneumonia 
K KH Y LGT, SGT Application based 
question/ 
Viva voce 
 
GM3.18 Describe and enumerate the indications for isolation and barrie r 
nursing in patients with pneumonia 
K KH Y LGT, SGT Application based 
question/ 
Viva voce 
 
GM 3.19 Describe and discuss the supportive therapy in patients  w i t h  
pneumonia including oxygen use and indications for ventilation 
K KH Y LGT, SGT Application based 
question/ 
Viva voce 
 
GM 3.20 Communicate and counsel patient on family on the diagno sis and 
therapy of pneumonia 
C/A SH Y Bedside clinic, 
DOAP 
Skill assessment 
OSCE 
 
GM 3.21 Discuss, describe, enumerate the indications for pneumococcal and 
influenza vaccines 
K KH Y LGT / 
SGT 
Application based 
questions/ 
Viva voce 
 
GM 3.22 Communicate and counsel patient for pneumococcal and in fluenza 
Vaccines 
S/C SH Y Bedside clinic / 
DOAP 
OSCE

47  
Number COMPETENCY 
The student should be able to 
Predominant 
Domain 
K/S/A/C 
Level 
K/KH/S 
H/P 
Core 
(Y/N) 
Suggested Teaching 
Learning method 
Suggested 
Assessment 
method 
Number 
required 
to certify 
P 
Topic 4: Fever and febrile syndromes                                              Number of competencies: (20)                           Number of competencies that require certification : ( 01) 
GM4.1 Describe and discuss the febrile response and the influence of host 
I m m u n e  s t a t u s ,  r i s k  f a c t o r s ,  s p e c i a l  p o p u l a t i o n s  ( e l d e r l y ,  
Immunosuppressed, malignancy, neutropenia HIV and travel) and 
comorbidities on the febrile response 
K KH Y LGT, SGT Application based 
question/ Viva voce 
 
GM 4.2 Describe and discuss the patho-physiology and difference s between 
fever and hyperthermia. 
K KH Y LGT, SGT Application based 
question, Viva voce 
 
GM 4.3 Enumerate various common causes of fever and hyperthermi a in 
various regions in India. 
K K Y LGT, SGT MCQs/ Written, 
Viva voce 
 
GM4.4 Describe and discuss the pathophysiology and manifestations of 
inflammatory causes of fever 
K KH Y LGT, SGT Application based 
question, 
Viva voce 
 
GM4.5 Describe and discuss the pathophysiology and manifestations of 
malignant causes of fever including hematologic and lymph node 
Malignancies 
K KH Y LGT, SGT Application based 
question, 
Viva voce 
 
GM4.6 Discuss the approach to the patient with Acute Febrile Il lness. K KH Y LGT, SGT Application based 
question, 
, Viva voce 
 
GM4.7 Discuss and describe the pathophysiology and manifestations of the 
sepsis syndrome 
K KH Y LGT, SGT Application based 
question, 
Viva voce 
 
GM4.8 Describe and discuss the pathophy siology, clinical features and  
management of heat related illness (heat cramps, heat exhaustio n 
and heat stroke). 
K KH Y LGT, SGT Application based 
question, 
Viva voce 
 
GM4.9 Discuss and describe the pathophysiology, aetiology and c linical 
manifestations of fever of unknown origin (FUO) including in a 
normal host neutropenic host nosocomial host and a host with HI V 
Disease 
K KH Y LGT, SGT Application based 
question, 
Viva voce 
 
GM4.10 Elicit document and present a medical history that helps deline ate 
the aetiology of fever that includes the evolution and pattern of 
fever, associated symptoms, Immune  status, comorbidities, risk 
factors, exposure through occupation, travel and environment an d 
S SH Y Bedside clinic, DOAP Long/short 
case/OSCE

48  
Number COMPETENCY 
The student should be able to 
Predominant 
Domain 
K/S/A/C 
Level 
K/KH/S 
H/P 
Core 
(Y/N) 
Suggested Teaching 
Learning method 
Suggested 
Assessment 
method 
Number 
required 
to certify 
P 
 medication use       
GM4.11 Perform a systematic examination that establishes the diagnosis and 
severity of presentation that includes: general skin mucosal an d 
lymph  node  examination,  chest  and  abdominal  examination 
(including examination of the liver and spleen) 
S SH Y Bedside clinic, DOAP Long/short case or 
OSCE 
2 
GM4.12 Generate a differential diagnosis and prioritise based o n clinical 
features that help distinguish between infective, inflammatory,  
malignant and rheumatologic causes 
K SH Y Bedside clinic, SGT Long/short case  
GM4.13 Order and interpret diagnostic tests based on the differential 
diagnosis including: CBC with differential, peripheral smear, u rinary 
analysis with sediment, Chest X ray and other Imaging, blood an d 
urine cultures, sputum gram stain and cultures, sputum AFB and 
cultures, CSF analysis, pleural and body fluid analysis, stool routine 
and culture, serology, FNAC, biopsy, bone marrow examination and 
QBC. 
K SH Y Bedside clinic, SGT, 
Tutorial 
Skill assessment 
(OSCE/ viva Voce) 
 
GM4.14 Enumerate in a patient with prolonged fever, the indications fo r 
various tests and describe the findings in tests of inflammatio n and 
specific  rheumatologic  tests,  serologic  testing  for  patho gens 
including HIV, bone marrow aspiration and biopsy 
K KH N LGT, SGT Viva voce  
GM4.15 Observe and assist in the performance of a bone marrow a spiration 
and biopsy in a simulated environment 
S SH N Skills lab- 
DOAP 
Log 
book/documentatio 
n 
 
G M 4 . 1 6  E n u m e r a t e  t h e  i n d i c a t i o n s  f o r  u s e  o f  I m a g i n g  i n  t h e  d i a gnosis of 
febrile syndromes 
K K N LGT, SGT MCQ/ Written, 
Viva voce 
 
GM4.17 Interpret a PPD (Mantoux) in a given patient S SH Y DOAP  Logbook 
Documentation/OSC 
E 
 
GM4.18 Develop and present an appropriate diagnostic plan for patient with 
prolonged fever based on the clinical presentation, most likely  
diagnosis in a prioritised and cost-effective manner 
K KH Y Bedside clinic 
SGT 
Application based 
question/ 
Viva voce 
 
GM4.19 Develop an appropriate empiric treatment plan based on the 
patient’s clinical and Immune status pending definitive diagnosis 
 
S 
SH Y SGT 
Tutorial 
Skill assessment 
OSCE

49  
Number COMPETENCY 
The student should be able to 
Predominant 
Domain 
K/S/A/C 
Level 
K/KH/S 
H/P 
Core 
(Y/N) 
Suggested Teaching 
Learning method 
Suggested 
Assessment 
method 
Number 
required 
to certify 
P 
GM4.20 Communicate to the patient and family the diagnosis and treatment 
in a case of prolonged fever 
C SH Y Bedside clinic, 
DOAP 
Skill assessment 
OSCE 
 
Topic 5: Liver disease                                                                            Number of competencies: (17)                                    Number of competencies that  require certification : ( 02) 
GM 5.1 Describe and discuss the physiologic and biochemical bas is of 
hyperbilirubinemia 
K KH Y LGT, SGT Application based 
questions / 
Viva voce 
 
GM 5.2 Describe and discuss the etiology and pathophysiology of variou s 
types of liver diseases. 
K KH Y LGT, SGT Application based 
questions / 
Viva voce 
 
GM 5.3 Describe and discuss the epidemiology, microbiology, Immunology 
and clinical evolution of infective (viral) hepatitis 
K KH Y LGT, SGT Application based 
questions / 
Viva voce 
 
GM 5.4 Describe and discuss the pathophysiology and clinical evolution of 
alcoholic liver disease 
K KH Y LGT, SGT Application based 
questions / 
Viva voce 
 
GM 5.5 Describe and discuss the pathophysiology, clinical evolu tion and 
complications of cirrhosis of liver and portal hypertension inc luding 
ascites, spontaneous bacterial p eritonitis, hepato-renal syndro me, 
hepatic encephalopathy, acute GI bleed  and hepatocellular 
Carcinoma 
K KH Y LGT, SGT Application based 
questions / 
Viva voce 
 
GM 5.6 Enumerate and describe the causes and 
pathophysiology of drug induced liver injury 
K KH Y LGT, SGT Application based 
questions / 
Viva voce 
 
GM 5.7 Describe and discuss the pathophysiology, clinical evolu tion and 
complications Cholelithiasis and cholecystitis 
K KH Y LGT, SGT Application based 
questions / 
Viva voce 
 
GM 5.8 Elicit document and present a medical history that helps deline ate 
the aetiology of the current pre sentation and includes clinical  
presentation, risk factors, drug use, sexual history, vaccinati on 
history and family history in patients with liver disease 
S SH Y Bedside clinic, DOAP 
session 
(Long/short 
case/OSCE) 
Documentation in 
Journal 
 
GM 5.9 Perform a systematic examination that establishes the di agnosis S SH Y Bedside clinic, DOAP (Long/short case or 2

50  
Number COMPETENCY 
The student should be able to 
Predominant 
Domain 
K/S/A/C 
Level 
K/KH/S 
H/P 
Core 
(Y/N) 
Suggested Teaching 
Learning method 
Suggested 
Assessment 
method 
Number 
required 
to certify 
P 
 and severity that includes nutritional status, mental status, 
jaundice, abdominal distension ascites, features of porto-syste mic 
hypertension and hepatic encephalopathy 
   session OSCE) 
Documentation in 
Journal 
 
GM 5.10 Generate a differential diagnosis and prioritize based on clini cal 
features that suggest a specific aetiology for the presenting 
symptom in patient with liver disease 
K 
S 
KH 
SH 
Y Bedside clinic, SGT (Long/short case) 
Documentation in 
Journal 
 
GM 5.11 Choose and interpret appropriate diagnostic tests inclu ding: CBC, 
bilirubin, liver function tests, Hepatitis serology  and asciti c fluid 
examination in patient with liver diseases 
S SH Y Bedside clinic, SGT 
Tutorial 
(OSCE/ viva Voce)  
GM 5.12 Enumerate the indications for ultrasound and other Imaging studies 
including MRCP and ERCP and describe the findings in liver disease 
K KH Y Bedside clinic, SGT 
Tutorial 
Application based 
question / 
Viva voce 
 
GM 5.13 Outline a diagnostic approach to  liver  disease  based  on 
hyperbilirubinemia, liver function changes and hepatitis serology 
K KH Y LGT/ Bedside clinic/ SGT 
Tutorial 
Application based 
question / 
Viva voce 
 
GM 5.14 Assist in the performance and interpret the findings of  an ascitic 
fluid analysis 
S SH Y Bedside, DOAP, Skills Lab Documentation in 
Logbook / 
Viva voce,OSCE 
2 
GM 5.15 Describe and discuss the management of hepatitis, cirrh osis, portal 
hypertension, ascites spontaneou s, bacterial peritonitis, acute  G I  
Bleed , hepatic encephalopathy and hepatocellular carcinoma 
K KH Y LGT, SGT Application based 
questions / 
Viva voce 
 
GM 5.16 Enumerate the indications, precautions and counsel patients on 
vaccination for hepatitis 
K 
/C 
KH 
SH 
Y LGT, SGT 
Bedside clinic 
Role play 
Application based 
questions / 
Viva voce/ OSCE 
 
GM 5.17 Enumerate the indications for hepatic transplantation K  K  Y  L G T ,  S G T  Application based 
questions / 
Viva voce 
 
Topic 6: HIV                                                      Number of competencies: (22)                                                     Number of competencies that require certification : (01) 
GM6.1 Describe and discuss the symptoms and signs of acute HIV sero- 
conversion 
K KH Y LGT, SGT Application based 
question, Viva voce 
 
GM6.2 Define and classify HIV AIDS based on the CDC criteria K K Y LGT, SGT MCQ/Written

51  
Number COMPETENCY 
The student should be able to 
Predominant 
Domain 
K/S/A/C 
Level 
K/KH/S 
H/P 
Core 
(Y/N) 
Suggested Teaching 
Learning method 
Suggested 
Assessment 
method 
Number 
required 
to certify 
P 
      Viva voce  
GM6.3 Describe and discuss the re lationship between CD4 count a nd the 
risk of opportunistic infections 
K KH Y LGT, SGT Application based 
question, Viva voce 
 
GM6.4 Describe  and discuss the pathogenesis, evolution and clinical 
features of common HIV related opportunistic infections 
K KH Y LGT, SGT Application based 
question, Viva voce 
 
GM6.5 Describe  and discuss the pathogenesis, evolution and clinical 
features of common HIV related malignancies 
K KH Y LGT, SGT Application based 
question, Viva voce 
 
GM6.6 Describe and discuss the pathogenesis, evolution and clinical 
features of common HIV related skin and oral lesions 
K KH Y LGT, SGT Application based 
question, Viva voce 
 
GM6.7 Elicit document and present a medical history that helps deline ate 
the aetiology of the current presentation and includes risk factors for 
HIV, mode of infection, other sexually transmitted diseases, risks 
for opportunistic infections and nutritional status 
S SH Y Bedside clinic, DOAP Short case/OSCE  
GM6.8 Generate a differential diagnosis and prioritise based on clini cal 
features that suggest a specific aetiology for the presenting 
symptom 
S SH Y Bedside clinic, DOAP,SGT Short case/OSCE  
GM6.9 Choose and interpret appropriate diagnostic tests to diag nose and 
classify the severity of HIV-AIDS including specific tests of HIV, CDC 
S SH Y Bedside clinic, SGT 
Tutorial 
Skill assessment 
(OSCE/ viva Voce) 
 
GM6.10 Choose and interpret appropriate diagnostic tests to diagnose 
opportunistic infections including CBC, sputum examination and 
c u l t u r e s ,   b l o o d   c u l t u r e s ,   s t o o l   a n a l y s i s ,   C S F   a n a l y s i s ,   Chest 
radiographs. 
S KH Y Bedside clinic, SGT 
Tutorial 
Skill assessment 
(OSCE/ viva Voce) 
 
GM6.11 Enumerate the indications and describe the findings for CT of the 
chest, brain and MRI Brain in a patient with opportunistic infections 
K KH N Bedside clinic 
SGT, Tutorial 
Application based 
question, Viva voce 
 
GM6.12 Enumerate the indications for and interpret the results of: Pul se 
oximetry, ABG, Chest Radiograph in a patient with opportunistic  
infections 
K K, 
KH 
Y Bedside clinic, SGT 
Tutorial 
Written/MCQ, Viva 
voce 
 
GM6.13 Describe and enumerate the indications and side effects of drug s 
for bacterial, viral and other types of diarrhea in a patient s uffering 
from HIV/AIDS 
K K, 
KH 
Y LGT, 
SGT 
Written/MCQ, Viva 
voce 
 
GM6.14 Discuss and describe the principles  of HAART,  the classes of K KH Y LGT, Application based

52  
Number COMPETENCY 
The student should be able to 
Predominant 
Domain 
K/S/A/C 
Level 
K/KH/S 
H/P 
Core 
(Y/N) 
Suggested Teaching 
Learning method 
Suggested 
Assessment 
method 
Number 
required 
to certify 
P 
 antiretroviral used, adverse reactions and interactions in a pa tient 
suffering from HIV/AIDS 
   SGT question, Viva voce  
GM 6.15 Discuss and describe the pathogenesis of IRIS and its m anagement. K KH Y LGT, 
SGT 
Application based 
question, Viva voce 
 
GM6.16 Discuss and describe the principles and regimens used in  p o s t  
exposure prophylaxis 
K KH Y LGT, 
SGT 
Application based 
question, Viva voce 
 
GM6.17 Enumerate the indications and discuss prophylactic drugs  used t o  
prevent HIV related opportunistic infections 
K KH Y LGT, 
SGT 
Application based 
question, Viva voce 
 
GM6.18 Counsel patients on prevention of HIV transmission. C/S SH Y Bedside clinic DOAP Skills assessment - 
OSCE 
3 
GM6.19 Communicate diagnosis, treatment plan and subsequent follow up 
plan to patients with HIV/AIDS 
C/S SH Y Bedside clinic 
DOAP 
Skills assessment - 
OSCE 
 
GM6.20 Communicate with patients with HIV/AIDS on the importanc e of 
medication adherence 
C/S SH Y Bedside clinic 
DOAP 
Skills assessment - 
OSCE 
 
G M 6 . 2 1  D e m o n s t r a t e  u n d e r s t a n d i n g  o f  e t h i c a l  a n d  l e g a l  i s s u e s  r egarding 
patient confidentiality and disclosure in patients with HIV/AIDS 
K/A SH Y Bedside clinic 
DOAP, SGT 
Skills assessment - 
OSCE 
Viva voce 
 
GM6.22 Demonstrate a non- judgmental attitude to patients with HIV/AIDS 
and to their lifestyles including gender orientation 
A SH Y Bedside clinic 
DOAP 
SGT 
Skills assessment - 
OSCE 
 
Topic 7: Rheumatologic problems                                                    Number of competencies: (22)                          Number of competencies that require c ertification : ( NIL) 
GM7.1 Describe the pathophysiology and genetic basis  
of autoimmune disease 
K KH Y LGT, SGT Written/ Vivavoce  
GM7.2 Classify cause o f joint pain based on the pathophysiology K KH Y LGT, SGT Written/ Vivavoce  
GM7.3 Develop a systematic clinical approach to joint pain based on 
The pathophysiology 
K KH Y LGT, SGT Written/ Vivavoce  
GM7.4 Describe and discriminate acute, subacute and chronic cau ses 
Of joint pain 
K KH Y LGT, SGT Written/ Vivavoce  
GM7.5 Discriminate, describe and discuss arthralgia from arthritis, articular 
from periarticular complaints a nd Mechanical from inflammatory 
causes of joint pain 
K KH Y LGT, SGT Written/ Vivavoce

53  
Number COMPETENCY 
The student should be able to 
Predominant 
Domain 
K/S/A/C 
Level 
K/KH/S 
H/P 
Core 
(Y/N) 
Suggested Teaching 
Learning method 
Suggested 
Assessment 
method 
Number 
required 
to certify 
P 
GM7.6 Describe the commo n signs and symptoms of 
Articular and periarticular diseases 
K KH Y LGT, SGT Written/ Vivavoce  
GM7.7 Describe the systemic manifestations of rheumatologic dis ease K KH Y LGT, SGT Written/ Vivavoce  
GM7.8 Elicit document and present a medical history that will 
differentiate the aetiologies of disease 
S SH Y Bedside clinic,DOAP Skill 
assessment/OSCE 
 
GM7.9 Perform a systematic examination of all joints, muscle an d skin 
That will establish the diagnosis andseverity of disease 
S SH Y Bedside clinic,DOAP Skill assessment  
GM7.10 Generate a differential diagnosis and prioritise based on
Clinical features that suggest a specific aetiology 
K/S KH Y Bedside clinic, SGT Skill 
assessment/Written 
 
GM7.11 Describe the appropriate diagnostic work up based on the  presumed 
aetiology and Enumerate the indications for and interpret the results 
of : CBC, anti-CCP,RA, ANA,DNA andother tests 
Of autoimmunity 
K KH Y Bedside clinic, SGT Skill 
assessment/Written 
/OSCE 
 
GM7.12 Enumerate the indications for arthrocentesis K K Y SGT,L GT Written/ 
Vivavoce/log book 
 
GM7.13 Enumerate the indications and interpret plain radiographs of joints K SH Y Bedside clinic, SGT Skill 
assessment/OSCE 
 
GM7.14 Communicate diagnosis, treatment plan and subsequent fol low 
Up plan to patients 
C SH Y DOAP Skill 
Assessment /OSCE 
 
GM7.15 Develop an appropriate treatment plan for patients with 
rheumatologic diseases 
K KH Y Bedside clinic, SGT Application Based 
questions/Skil l 
assessment/Written 
 
GM7.16 Select, prescribe and communicate appropriate medications for 
relief of joint pain and preventive therapy for crystalline 
arthropathies 
K/C SH Y DOAP Application 
based 
questions/Skill 
assessment/Written 
 
GM7.17 Select, prescribe and communicate treatment option for s ystemic 
rheumatologic conditions 
K/C SH Y DOAP Skill 
assessment/OSCE 
 
GM7.18 Describe the basis for biologic and disease modifying therapy  in 
rheumatologic diseases 
K KH Y Bedside clinic, SGT Skill 
assessment/Written 
//OSCE

54  
Number COMPETENCY 
The student should be able to 
Predominant 
Domain 
K/S/A/C 
Level 
K/KH/S 
H/P 
Core 
(Y/N) 
Suggested Teaching 
Learning method 
Suggested 
Assessment 
method 
Number 
required 
to certify 
P 
GM7.19 Communicate and incorporate patient preferences in the c hoice 
Of therapy 
C/A SH Y DOAP Skill 
assessment//OSCE 
 
GM7.20 Develop and communicate appropriate follow up and monitoring 
plans for patients with rheumatologic conditions 
C SH Y DOAP Application 
based 
questions/Skill 
assessment//OSCE 
 
GM7.21 Demonstrate an understanding of the impact of
Rheumatologic conditions on quality of life, well-being, work and 
family 
A SH Y DOAP Skill 
assessment/OSCE 
 
GM7.22 Determine the need fors p ecialist consultation K K Y SGT ,LGT Vivavoce  
Topic 8: Hypertension                                                                           Number of competencies: (19)                       Number of competencies that require certification : (NIL) 
GM 8.1 Describe and discuss the epidemiology, genetic basis aet iology and 
the prevalence of primary and secondary hypertension 
K KH Y LGT,SGT Written/Viva voce  
GM 8.2 Describe and discuss the pathophysiology of hypertension K  K H  Y  L G T , S G T  W r i t t e n / V i v a  v o c e   
GM 8.3 Define and classify hypertension K KH Y LGT,SGT Written/ Viva voce  
GM 8.4 Describe and discuss the differences between primary and 
secondary hypertension 
K KH Y LGT,SGT Written/Viva voce  
GM 8.5 Define, describe and discuss and recognise hypertensive urgency 
and emergency 
K KH Y LGT,SGT Written/Viva voce  
GM 8.6 Describe and discuss the clinical manifestations of the various 
aetiologies of secondary causes of hypertension 
K KH Y LGT,SGT Written/Viva voce  
GM 8.7 Describe, discuss and identify target organ damage due t o 
Hypertension 
K KH Y LGT,SGT Written/Viva voce  
GM 8.8 Elicit document and present a medical history that includes: 
duration and levels, symptoms, comorbidities, lifestyle, risk factors, 
family history, psychosocial and environmental factors, dietary 
assessment, previous and concomitant therapy 
S SH Y Bedside clinic, DOAP Skill assessment  
GM 8.10 Generate a differential diagnosis and prioritise based on clinical 
features that suggest a specific aetiology 
S SH Y Bedside clinic, DOAP Skill assessment

55  
GM 8.11 Describe the appropriate diagnostic work up based on th e 
presumed aetiology 
K KH Y SGT Written / Viva  
Number COMPETENCY 
The student should be able to 
Predominant 
Domain 
K/S/A/C 
Level 
K/KH/S 
H/P 
Core 
(Y/N) 
Suggested Teaching 
Learning method 
Suggested 
Assessment 
method 
Number 
required 
to certify 
P 
GM 8.12 Enumerate the indications for and interpret the results  of : CBC, 
Urine routine, BUN, Cr, Electrolytes, Uric acid, ECG 
K KH Y LGT,SGT Written/Viva voce  
GM 8.13 Develop an appropriate treatment plan for essential hyp ertension K KH Y LGT,SGT Written/Viva voce  
GM 8.14 Recognise, prioritise a nd manage hypertensive emergencies K KH Y LGT,SGT Written/Viva voce  
GM 8.15 Develop and communicate to the patient lifestyle modification 
including weight reduction, moderation of alcohol intake, physical 
activity and sodium intake 
C SH Y DOAP SELF ASSESSMENT  
GM 8.16 Perform and interpret a 12 lead ECG S P Y DOAP Log Book /Skills 
Station 
 
GM 8.17 Counsel a patient and incorporate patient preferences i n the 
management of HTN 
A/C SH Y DOAP Skill assessment  
GM 8.18 Demonstrate understanding of the impact of Hypertension  on 
quality of life, well being, work and family 
A SH Y Bed Side Clinic/DOAP Faculty Observation  
GM 8.19 Determine the need for specialist consultation K KH Y L GT/SGT Written / Viva  
Topic 9: Anaemia                                                                                                             Number of competencies: (21)            Number of competencies t hat require certification : (NIL) 
GM9.1 Define, describe and classify anemia based on red blood c ell 
sizeandreticulocyte count 
K KH Y LGT, SGT Written/ Vivavoce  
GM9.2 Describe and discuss the morphological characteristics,
aetiologyandprevalence ofeachofthe causes ofanemia 
K KH Y LGT, SGT Written/ Vivavoce  
GM9.3 Elicit document and present a medical history that 
includes symptoms,  risk  factors  including  GI  bleeding,  pr ior 
history, medications, menstrual history, andfamilyhistory 
S SH Y Bed side clinic, DOAP Skill assessment  
GM9.4 Perform a systematic  examination that includes  : 
generalexamination for pallor, oral examination,  DOAP of
Hyperdynamic circulation, lymphnode and splenic examination 
S SH Y Bedside clinic Skill 
assessment/OSCE 
 
GM9.5 Generate a differential diagnosis and prioritise based on
Clinical features that suggest a specific aetiology 
S SH Y Bedside clinic, DOAP Skill 
assessment/Written

56  
GM9.6 Describe the appropriate diagnostic work up based on
The presumed aetiology 
S SH Y Bedside clinic, DOAP Skill 
assessment/Written 
 
GM9.7 Describe and discuss the meaning and utility of component s of the K KH Y LGT, SGT Written/ Viva voce/  
 hemogram, various tests for iron deficiency, red cell indices, 
reticulocytecount, ironstudies, p eripheral smear, B12 and folat e 
levels 
    Skill assessment  
GM9.8 Describe  the indications and interpret the results of a bone 
marrowaspirations and biopsy 
K KH Y LGT, SGT Written/ Viva voce  
GM9.8 Describe the indications and interpret the results of a bone 
marrowaspirations and biopsy 
K KH Y LGT, SGT Written/ Viva voce  
GM9.9 Describe, develop a diagnostic plan to determine the aeti ology 
Ofanemia 
K KH Y LGT, SGT Written/ Viva voce/ 
Skill assessment 
 
GM9.10 Prescribe replacement the rapy with iron, B12, folate S S H Y Bedside clinic, DOAP Skill 
assessment/Written 
 
GM9.11 Describe the national programs for anemia prevention K K H Y LGT, SGT Written/Vivavoce  
GM9.12 Communicate the diagnosis and treatment appropriately to  patients C SH Y DOAP Skill 
assessment/OSCE 
 
GM9.13 Incorporatepatientpreferencesinthemanagementofanemia C S H Y DOAP Skill 
assessment/OSCE 
 
GM9.14 Describe the indications for blood transfusion and the
Appropriate use of blood components 
K KH Y LGT, SGT Written/ Viva voce/ 
Skill assessment 
 
GM9.15 Describe the precautions required necessary when perform ing 
A blood transfusion 
K KH Y LGT, SGT Written/ Viva voce/ 
Skill assessment 
 
GM9.16 Communicate and counsel patients with methods to prevent  
nutritional Anemia 
C SH Y DOAP Skill 
assessment/OSCE 
 
GM9.17 Determine the need fors p ecialist consultation K KH Y LG T,SGT Written/OSCE  
Topic 10: Acute Kidney Injury and Chronic renal failure                                                          Number of competencies: (24) Number of competencies that require certificati on : (01 ) 
GM10.1 Define, describe, classify, differentiate between the
pathophysiologic causes of acute and chronic renal failure 
K KH Y LGT, SGT Written/ Vivavoce  
GM10.2 Describe  the pathophysiology and causes of pre renal ARF, 
Renal and post-renal ARF 
K KH Y LGT, SGT Written/ Vivavoce

57  
Number COMPETENCY 
The student should be able to 
Predominant 
Domain 
K/S/A/C 
Level 
K/KH/S 
H/P 
Core 
(Y/N) 
Suggested Teaching 
Learning method 
Suggested 
Assessment 
method 
Number 
required 
to certify 
P 
GM10.3 Describe the evolution, n atural history and treatment of ARF K KH Y LGT, SGT Written/ Vivavoce  
GM10.4 Describe and discuss the aetiology and staging ofCKD K KH Y LGT,SGT Written/ Vivavoce  
GM10.5 Describe and discuss the pathophysiology and clinical findings 
Of uraemia 
K KH Y LGT, SGT Written/ Vivavoce  
GM10.6 Classify, describe and discuss the significance ofproteinuria in CKD K K H Y LGT, SGT Written/ Vivavoce  
G M 1 0 . 7  D e s c r i b e   a n d   d i s c u s s   t h e   p a t h o p h y s i o l o g y   o f   a n e m i a  a n d  
hyperparathyroidismin CKD 
K KH Y LGT, SGT Written/ Vivavoce  
GM10.8 Describe  and discuss the association between CKD glycemia 
And hypertension 
K KH Y LGT, SGT Written/ Vivavoce  
GM10.9 Elicit document and present a medical history that will 
differentiatethe aetiologies of disease, distinguish acute and chronic 
disease, identify predisposing conditions, nephrotoxic drugs an d 
Systemiccauses 
S SH Y Bedside clinic, DOAP Skill assessment  
GM10.10 Perform a systematic examination that establishes the diagnosisand 
s e v e r i t y  i n c l u d i n g  d e t e r m i n a t i o n  o f  v o l u m e  s t a t u s ,  p r e s e n c e  
o f e d e m a   a n d   h e a r t   f a i l u r e ,   f e a t u r e s   o f   u r a e m i a   a n d  
Associated systemic disease 
S SH Y Bedside clinic, DOAP Skill assessment  
GM10.11 Generate a differential diagnosis and prioritise based on 
clinical features that suggest a specificaetiology 
K KH Y DOAP, SGT Skill 
assessment/Written 
/ Vivavoce 
 
GM10.12 Describe the appropriate diagnostic work up based on 
the presumed aetiology 
K SH Y DOAP, SGT Skill 
assessment/Written 
/ Vivavoce 
 
GM10.13 Enumerate the indications for an d interpret the results of : re nal 
function tests, calcium, phosphorus, PTH, urine
electrolytes, osmolality, Anion gap, FENa (Fractional Excretion  o f  
Sodium),CrCl (Creatinine Clearance) and renal ultrasound 
K KH Y DOAP, SGT Skill 
assessment/Written 
/ Vivavoce 
2 
GM10.14 Identify theECG findings  in hyperkalemia S SH Y DOAP, S GT Skill 
assessment/Written 
/ Vivavoce 
 
GM10.15 Describe  and discuss the indications to performarterial blood S P Y DOAP documentation in

58  
Number COMPETENCY 
The student should be able to 
Predominant 
Domain 
K/S/A/C 
Level 
K/KH/S 
H/P 
Core 
(Y/N) 
Suggested Teaching 
Learning method 
Suggested 
Assessment 
method 
Number 
required 
to certify 
P 
 gasanalysis: interpret the data     logbook  
GM10.16 Describe and discuss the indications for and insert a
Peripheral intravenous catheter 
S P Y DOAP,Bedside clinic documentation 
inlogbook 
 
GM10.17 Communicate diagnosis, treatment plan and subsequent follow 
up plan to patients 
C SH Y DOAP Skill 
assessment/OSCE 
 
GM10.18 Counsel patients on a renal diet K SH Y DOAP Skillasses sment/OSC 
E 
 
GM10.19 Identify  and describe the priorities in the management of 
ARFincluding diet, volume management, alteration in doses of 
drugs, monitoring and indicationsfor dialysis 
K/C KH Y LGT, SGT Written/ Vivavoce  
GM10.20 Describe and discuss supportive therapy in CKD including diet, anti- 
hypertensives, glycemic therapy, dyslipidemia, anemia, 
hyperkalemia, hyperphosphatemia and 
Secondary hyperparathyroidism 
K KH Y  
LGT, SGT 
Written/ Vivavoce  
GM10.21 Describe and discuss the indications for renal dialysis C/A KH Y LGT, SGT Written/ Vivavoce  
GM10.22 Describe and discuss the indications for renal replacem ent therapy C KH Y LGT,SGT Written/ 
Vivavoce//OSCE 
 
GM10.23 Describe discuss and communicate the ethical and legal
Issues involved in renal replacement therapy 
C/A KH Y LGT, SGT Written/ Vivavoce  
GM10.24 Recognise the Impact of CKD on patient’s quality of life, well- being, 
work and family and Incorporate patient preferences into the care of 
CKD 
A/C KH Y LGT, SGT,Bedside clinic observationbyfacult 
y/OSCE 
 
Topic 11: Diabetes Mellitus                                                   Number of competencies: (24)                         Number of competencies that require certification : ( 01) 
GM 11.1 Define and classify diabetes K KH Y LGT, SGT Written/Vi va voce  
GM 11.2 Describe and discuss the epidemiology and pathogenesis and risk 
factors and clinical evolution of type 1 diabetes 
K KH Y LGT, 
SGT 
Written/Viva voce  
GM 11.3 Describe and discuss the epidemiology and pathogenesis and risk 
factors economic Impact and clinical evolution of type 2 diabetes 
K KH Y LGT, SGT Written/Viva voce  
GM 11.4 Describe and discuss the genetic background and the inf luence of 
the environment on diabetes 
K KH Y LGT, SGT Written/Viva voce

59  
Number COMPETENCY 
The student should be able to 
Predominant 
Domain 
K/S/A/C 
Level 
K/KH/S 
H/P 
Core 
(Y/N) 
Suggested Teaching 
Learning method 
Suggested 
Assessment 
method 
Number 
required 
to certify 
P 
GM 11.5 Describe and discuss the pathogenesis and temporal evol ution of 
microvascular and macrovascular complications of diabetes 
      
GM 11.6 Describe and discuss the pathogenesis and precipitating  factors, 
recognition and management of diabetic emergencies 
K KH Y LGT, SGT Written/Viva voce  
GM 11.7 Elicit document and present a medical history that will differentiate 
the aetiologies of diabetes including risk factors, precipitating 
factors, lifestyle, nutritional history, family history, medication 
history, co-morbidities and target organ disease 
K KH Y LGT, SGT Written/Viva voce  
GM 11.8 Perform a systematic exa mination that establishes the diagnosis 
and severity that includes skin, peripheral pulses, blood pressure 
measurement, fundus examination, detailed examination of the 
foot (pulses, nervous and deformities and injuries) 
K KH Y LGT, SGT Written/Viva voce  
GM 11.9 Describe and recognise the clinical features of patient s who present 
with a diabetic emergency 
K KH Y LGT, SGT Written/Viva voce  
GM 11.10 Generate a differential diagnosis and prioritise based on clinical 
features that suggest a specific aetiology 
K KH Y LGT, SGT Written/Viva voce  
GM 11.11 Order and interpret laboratory tests to diagnose diabetes and its 
complications including: glucoses, glucose tolerance test, 
glycosylated hemoglobin, urinary micro albumin, ECG, electrolytes, 
ABG, ketones, renal function tests and lipid profile 
K KH Y LGT, SGT Written/Viva voce  
GM 11.12 Perform and interpret a capillary blood glucose test K  KH Y LGT, SGT Written/Viva voce 2 
GM 11.13 Perform and interpret a urinary ketone estimation with  a dipstick K KH Y LGT, SGT Written/Viva voce  
GM 11.14 Recognise the presentation of hypoglycaemia and outline the 
principles on its therapy 
K KH Y LGT, SGT Written/Viva voce  
GM 11.15 Recognise the presentation of diabetic emergencies and  outline the 
principles of therapy 
K KH Y LGT, SGT Written/Viva voce  
GM 11.16 Discuss and describe the pharmacologic therapies for d iabetes their 
indications, contraindications, adverse reactions and interactions 
K KH Y LGT, SGT Written/Viva voce  
GM 11.17 Outline a therapeutic approach to therapy of T2Diabete s based on 
presentation, severity and complications in a cost-effective manner 
K KH Y LGT, SGT Written/Viva voce

60  
Number COMPETENCY 
The student should be able to 
Predominant 
Domain 
K/S/A/C 
Level 
K/KH/S 
H/P 
Core 
(Y/N) 
Suggested Teaching 
Learning method 
Suggested 
Assessment 
method 
Number 
required 
to certify 
P 
GM 11.18 Describe and discuss the pharmacology, indications, adverse 
reactions and interactions of drugs used in the prevention and 
treatment of target organ damage and complications of Type II 
Diabetes including neuropathy, nephropathy, retinopathy, 
hypertension, dyslipidemia and cardiovascular disease 
K KH Y LGT, SGT Written/Viva voce  
GM 11.19 Demonstrate and counsel patients on the correct techni que to 
administer insulin 
K KH Y LGT,SGT Written/Viva voce  
GM11.20 Demonstrate to and counsel patients correct technique o n the of 
self-monitoring of blood glucoses 
K KH Y LGT,SGT Written/Viva voce  
GM11.21 Recognise the Importance  of patient preference while selecting 
therapy for diabetes 
K KH Y LGT, 
SGT 
Written/Viva voce  
GM 11.22 Enumerate the causes of hypoglycaemia and describe the  counter 
hormone response and the initial approach and treatment 
K KH Y LGT, 
SGT 
Written/Viva voce  
GM 11.23 Describe the precipitating causes, 
pathophysiology, recognition, clinical features, diagnosis, 
stabilisation and management of diabetic ketoacidosis 
K KH Y LGT, 
SGT 
Written/Viva voce  
GM 11.24 Describe the precipitating causes, pathophysiology, recognition, 
clinical features, diagnosis, stabilisation and management of 
Hyperosmolar non ketotic state 
K KH Y LGT, 
SGT 
Written/Viva voce  
Topic 12: Thyroid Dysfunction                                                          Number of competencies: (14)                                 Number of competencies that require certification : ( 01) 
GM 12.1 Describe the epidemiology, genetic basis and pathogenes is of 
hypothyroidism and hyperthyroidism including the influence of 
iodine deficiency and autoimmunity in the pathogenesis of thyro id 
disease 
K KH Y LGT,SGT Written/Viva voce  
GM 12.2 Describe and discuss the physiology of the hypothalamop ituitary - 
thyroid axis, principles of thyroid function testing and alterations in 
physiologic function 
K K Y LGT,SGT Written  
GM 12.3 Describe and discuss the principles of radio iodine upt ake in the 
diagnosis of thyroid disorders 
K KH Y LGT,SGT Written/Viva voce  
GM 12.4 Elicit document and present an appropriate history that will 
establish the diagnosis cause of thyroid dysfunction and its severity 
S SH Y Bedside clinic, Skill Lab Skills assessment

61  
Number COMPETENCY 
The student should be able to 
Predominant 
Domain 
K/S/A/C 
Level 
K/KH/S 
H/P 
Core 
(Y/N) 
Suggested Teaching 
Learning method 
Suggested 
Assessment 
method 
Number 
required 
to certify 
P 
GM 12.5 Perform and demonstrate a systematic examination based on the 
history that will help establish the diagnosis and severity including 
systemic signs of thyrotoxicosis and hypothyroidism, palpation of 
the rhythm abnormalities neck palpation of the 
thyroid and lymph nodes and cardiovascular findings 
S SH Y Bedside clinic, Skill Lab Skills assessment  
GM 12.6 Demonstrate the correct technique to palpate the thyroi d S SH Y Bedside clinic,DOAP Skill assessment  
GM 12.7 Generate a differential diagnosis based on the clinical  presentation 
and prioritise it based on the most likely diagnosis 
K KH Y Bedside clinic,SGT Written  
GM 12.8 Order and interpret diagnostic testing based on the clinical 
diagnosis including CBC, thyroid function tests and ECG and radio 
iodine uptake and scan 
S SH Y Bedside clinic,DOAP Skill assessment  
GM 12.9 Identify atrial fibrillation, pericardial effusion and bradycardia on 
ECG 
S SH Y Bedside clinic,DOAP Skill assessment  
GM 12.10 Interpret thyroid functi on tests in hypo and hyperthyroidism K KH Y LGT,SGT Written/Viva voce 2 
GM 12.11 Describe and discuss the iodisation programs of the government of 
India 
K KH Y LGT,SGT Written/Viva voce  
GM 12.12 Describe the pharmacology, indications, adverse reaction, 
interactions of thyroxine and antithyroid drugs 
K KH Y LGT,SGT Written/Viva voce  
GM 12.13 Write and communicate to the patient appropriately a prescription 
for thyroxine based on age, sex, and clinical and biochemical status 
S/C SH Y Skill Lab Skill assessment  
GM 12.14 Describe and discuss the indications of thionamide the rapy, radio 
iodine therapy and surgery in the management of thyrotoxicosis 
K KH Y Bedside clinic Written/Viva voce  
Topic 13: Common Malignancies / Oncology Number of competencies : (19) Number of competencies that require certification : ( NI L) 
GM 13.1 Describe the clinical epidemiology and inherited & modi fiable risk 
factors for common malignancies in India 
K K Y LGT,SGT Short note/Viva 
Voice 
 
GM 13.2 Describe the genetic basis of selected cancers K K Y LG T,SGT Short note/Viva 
Voice 
 
GM 13.3 Describe the relationship between infection and cancers  K  K  Y  L G T , S G T  S h o r t  n o t e / V i v a  
Voice 
 
GM 13.4 Describe the natural history, presentation, course, com plications K K N LGT,SGT Short note/Viva

62  
Number COMPETENCY 
The student should be able to 
Predominant 
Domain 
K/S/A/C 
Level 
K/KH/S 
H/P 
Core 
(Y/N) 
Suggested Teaching 
Learning method 
Suggested 
Assessment 
method 
Number 
required 
to certify 
P 
 and cause of death for common cancers     Voice  
GM 13.5 Describe the common issues encountered in patients at t he end of 
life and principles of management of end-of-life care. 
K K N LGT,SGT Short note/Viva 
Voice 
 
GM13.6 Describe and distinguish the difference between curative and 
palliative care in patients with cancer 
K K N LGT,SGT Short note/Viva 
voice 
 
GM 13.7 Elicit document and present a history that will help establish the 
aetiology of cancer and includes the appropriate risk factors, 
duration and evolution 
S K Y Bedside clinic Skill 
assessment/Short 
Case 
 
GM13.8 Perform and demonstrate a physical examination that incl udes an 
appropriate general and local examination that leads to the 
diagnosis, extent spread and complications of cancer 
S SH Y Bedside clinic Skill 
assessment/Short 
case 
 
GM13.9 Demonstrate in a mannequin the correct technique for performing 
breast exam rectal examination and cervical examination and pap  
smear 
S K Y Bedside clinic Skill 
assessment/Short 
Case 
 
GM13.10 Generate a differential diagnosis based on the presenting symptoms 
and clinical features in a cancer patient and identify the most  likely 
diagnosis 
S K Y Bedside clinic Skill assessment / 
Short Case 
 
GM13.11 Order and interpret diagnostic testing based on the cli nical 
diagnosis in a cancer patient. Including CBC and stool occult b lood 
and prostate specific antigen 
S K K Bedside clinic Skill assessment/ 
Short case 
 
GM13.12 Describe the indications and interpret the results of Chest X R ay, 
mammogram, skin and tissue biopsies and tumor markers used in 
common cancers 
K KH Y Bedside clinic,SGT Short note/Viva 
voice 
 
GM13.13 Describe and assess pain  and suffering objectively in a  patient with 
cancer 
K KH Y Bedside clinic,SGT Short 
note/Vivavoice 
 
GM13.14 Describe the indications for surgery, radiation and che motherapy 
for common malignancies 
K KH Y Bedside clinic,SGT Short note/Viva 
Voice 
 
GM13.15 Describe the need, tests involved, their utility in the  prevention of 
common malignancies 
K KH Y Bedside clinic,SGT Short note/Viva 
Voice 
 
GM13.16 Demonstrate an understanding of needs and preferences of 
patients when choosing curative and palliative therapy 
A/C KH Y Bedside clinic,SGT Short note/Viva 
voice

63  
Number COMPETENCY 
The student should be able to 
Predominant 
Domain 
K/S/A/C 
Level 
K/KH/S 
H/P 
Core 
(Y/N) 
Suggested Teaching 
Learning method 
Suggested 
Assessment 
method 
Number 
required 
to certify 
P 
GM13.17 Describe  and enumerate the indications, use, side effects of 
narcotics in pain alleviation in patients with cancer 
K KH Y Bedside clinic,SGT Short note/Viva 
Voice 
 
GM13.18 Describe and discuss the ethical and the medico legal i ssues 
involved in end-of-life care 
K KH Y Bedside clinic,SGT Short note/Viva 
Voice 
 
GM13.19 Describe the therapies used in alleviating suffering in  patients at the 
end of life 
K KH Y Bedside clinic,SGT Short note/Viva 
Voice 
 
Topic 14: Obesity                                                                                     Number of competencies: (14)                      Number of competencies that require c ertification : ( NIL) 
GM 14.1 Define and measure obesity as it relates to the Indian population K KH Y LGT,SGT Written/Viva voce  
GM 14.2 Describe and discuss the aetiology of obesity including modifiable 
and non-modifiable risk factors and secondary causes 
K KH Y LGT,SGT Written/Viva voce  
GM 14.1 Define and measure obesity as it relates to the Indian population K KH Y LGT,SGT Written/Viva voce  
GM 14.2 Describe and discuss the aetiology of obesity including modifiable 
and non-modifiable risk factors and secondary causes 
K KH Y LGT,SGT Written/Viva voce  
GM 14.3 Describe and discuss the monogenic forms of obesity K K H Y LGT,SGT Written/Viva voce  
GM 14.4 Describe and discuss the impact of environmental factors including 
eating habits, food, work, environment and physical activity on the 
incidence of obesity 
K K Y LGT,SGT Written/Viva voce  
GM 14.5 Describe and discuss the natural history of obesity and its 
complications 
K K Y LGT,SGT Written/Viva voce  
GM 14.6 Elicit and document and present an appropriate history that 
includes the natural history, dietary history, modifiable risk factors, 
family history clues for secondary causes and motivation to los e 
weight 
S SH Y Bedside clinic, Skill Lab Skills assessment  
GM 14.7 Perform, document and demonstrate a physical examinatio n based 
on the history that includes general examination, measurement of 
abdominal obesity, signs of secondary causes and comorbidities 
S SH Y Bedside clinic, Skill Lab Skills assessment  
GM 14.8 Generate a differential diagnosis based on the presenting symptoms 
and clinical features and prioritise based on the most likely 
diagnosis 
S SH Y Bedside clinic, Skill Lab Skills assessment  
GM 14.9 Order and interpret diagnostic tests based on the clini cal diagnosis S SH Y Bedside clinic, Skill Lab Skills assessmen t

64  
Number COMPETENCY 
The student should be able to 
Predominant 
Domain 
K/S/A/C 
Level 
K/KH/S 
H/P 
Core 
(Y/N) 
Suggested Teaching 
Learning method 
Suggested 
Assessment 
method 
Number 
required 
to certify 
P 
 including blood glucose, lipids, thyroid function tests etc.       
GM 14.10 Describe the indication s and interpret the results of tests for 
secondary causes of obesity 
S SH Y Bedside clinic, Skill Lab Skills assessment  
GM 14.11 Communicate and counsel patient on behavioural, dietary and 
lifestyle modifications 
C SH Y Bedside clinic, Skill Lab Skills assessment  
GM 14.12 Demonstrate an understanding of patient’s inability to  adhere to 
lifestyle instructions and counsel them in a non - judgemental way 
A/C SH Y Bedside clinic, Skill Lab Skills assessment  
GM 14.13 Describe and enumerate the indications, pharmacology, and side 
effects of pharmacotherapy for obesity and describe and 
enumerate indications and side effects bariatric surgery 
K K Y LGT,SGT Written/Viva voce  
GM 14.14 Describe and enumerate and educate patients, health care workers 
and the public on measures to prevent obesity and promote a 
healthy lifestyle 
K K Y LGT,SGT Written/Viva voce  
T o p i c  1 5 :  G I  B l e e d i n g                                        N u mber of competencies: (18)                                           Number of competencies that require certification : ( 01) 
GM 15.1 Enumerate, describe and discuss the aetiology of upper and lower 
GI bleeding 
K KH Y LGT, SGT 
(SGT) 
Application based 
questions / 
Viva voce 
 
GM 15.2 Enumerate, describe and discuss the evaluation and steps involved 
in stabilizing a patient who presents with acute volume loss an d GI 
bleed 
K KH Y LGT, SGT Application based 
questions / 
Viva voce 
 
GM 15.3 Describe and discuss the patho-physiological effects of acute blood 
and volume loss 
K KH Y LGT, 
SGT 
Application based 
questions / 
Viva voce 
 
GM 15.4 Elicit and document and present an appropriate history that 
i d e n t i f i e s  t h e  r o u t e  o f  b l e e d i n g ,  q u a n t i t y ,  g r a d e ,  v o l u m e  l o s s , 
duration, etiology, comorbid illnesses and risk factors 
S SH Y Bedside clinic / Tutorial Skills assessment - 
Short case/ OSCE/ 
Documentation in 
Journal 
 
GM 15.5 Perform, demonstrate and document a physical examination based 
o n   t h e   h i s t o r y   t h a t   i n c l u d e s   g e n e r a l   e x a m i n a t i o n ,   v o l u m e 
assessment and appropriate abdominal examination 
S SH Y Bedside clinic / Tutorial Skills assessment - 
Short case/OSCE 
Documentation in

65  
Number COMPETENCY 
The student should be able to 
Predominant 
Domain 
K/S/A/C 
Level 
K/KH/S 
H/P 
Core 
(Y/N) 
Suggested Teaching 
Learning method 
Suggested 
Assessment 
method 
Number 
required 
to certify 
P 
      Journal  
GM 15.6 Distinguish between upper and lower gastrointestinal bleeding 
based on the clinical features 
K KH Y LGT, 
SGT 
Application based 
questions 
Viva voce 
 
GM 15.7 Demonstrate the correct technique to perform an anal and rectal  
examination in a mannequin or equivalent 
S SH Y DOAP in skills lab Skills assessment – 
OSCE on mannequin 
 
GM 15.8 Generate a differential diagnosis based on the presenting symptoms 
and clinical features and prioritize based on the most likely diagnosis
K KH Y LGT, 
SGT/ 
Bedside clinic 
Application based 
questions / 
Viva voce/ Short 
Case 
 
GM 15.9 Choose and interpret diagnostic tests based on the clinical diagnosis 
i n c l u d i n g  c o m p l e t e  b l o o d  c o u n t ,  P T  a n d  P T T ,  s t o o l  e x a m i n a t i o n ,  
occult blood, liver function tests, H. Pylori test. 
S SH Y Bedside clinic, SGT 
Tutorial 
Skill assessment 
OSCE/ viva Voce) 
 
GM 15.10 Enumerate the indications for endoscopy, colonoscopy a nd other 
Imagingcompetencies in the investigation of Upper GI bleeding 
K KH Y Bedside clinic, SGT 
Tutorial 
Application based 
questions / 
Viva voce/ 
 
GM 15.11 Develop, document and present a treatment plan that includes fluid 
resuscitation, blood and blood component transfusion, and specific 
therapy for arresting blood loss 
K KH Y LGT, 
SGT/ Tutorial 
Application based 
questions / 
Viva voce 
 
GM 15.12 Enumerate the indications for whole blood, component and platelet 
transfusion and describe the clinical features and management of a 
mismatched transfusion 
K KH Y LGT, 
SGT/ Tutorial 
Application based 
questions / 
Viva voce 
 
GM 15.13 Observe cross matching and blood / blood component tra nsfusion S SH Y Bedside clinic, Direct 
observation in elective/ 
emergency Situation 
Skill assessment 
(OSCE/ viva Voce) 
2 
GM 15.14 Describe and enumerate the indications, pharmacology a nd side 
effects of pharmacotherapy of vas opressors used in the treatmen t 
of Upper GI bleed 
K KH Y LGT, 
SGT/ Tutorial 
Application based 
questions / 
Viva voce 
 
GM 15.15 Describe and enumerate the indications, pharmacology a nd side 
effects of pharmacotherapy of acid peptic disease including 
Helicobacter pylori 
K K, KH Y LGT, 
SGT 
Application based 
questions / 
Viva voce

66  
Number COMPETENCY 
The student should be able to 
Predominant 
Domain 
K/S/A/C 
Level 
K/KH/S 
H/P 
Core 
(Y/N) 
Suggested Teaching 
Learning method 
Suggested 
Assessment 
method 
Number 
required 
to certify 
P 
GM 15.16 Enumerate the indications for endoscopic interventions and Surgery 
in patient with GI Bleeding 
K K, KH Y LGT, 
SGT 
Application based 
questions / 
Viva voce 
 
GM 15.17 Determine appropriate level of specialist consultation as per clinical, 
hemodynamic status of the patient with GI bleed 
K K Y SGT Application based 
questions / 
Viva voce 
 
GM 15.18 Counsel the family and patient with GI Bleeding  on the diagnosis 
and therapeutic options in an empathetic non-judgmental manner 
S 
C 
SH Y Bedside clinic, DOAP 
Role play 
Skills assessment - 
OSCE 
 
Topic 16: Diarrheal Disorders                                              Number of competencies: (17)                                              Number of compete ncies that require certification : ( NIL ) 
GM 16.1 Describe and discuss the aetiology of acute and chronic diarrhe a 
including infectious and non- infectious causes 
K K 
KH 
Y LGT, 
SGT 
Application based 
questions / 
Viva voce 
 
GM 16.2 Describe and discuss the acute systemic consequences of diarrhea 
including its impact on fluid balance 
K K 
KH 
Y LGT 
SGT 
Application based 
questions / 
Viva voce 
 
GM 16.3 Describe and discuss the chronic effects of diarrhea in cluding 
malabsorption 
K K 
KH 
Y LGT 
SGT 
Application based 
questions / 
Viva voce 
 
GM 16.4 Elicit and document and present an appropriate history that 
includes the natural history, dietary history, travel, sexual h istory 
and other concomitant illnesses in a patient with Diarrhea 
S SH Y Bedside clinic, SGT Skill assessment 
(Short case or OSCE) 
 
GM 16.5 Perform, document and demonstrate a physical examination based 
on the history that includes general examination, including an 
appropriate abdominal examination 
S SH Y Bedside clinic, DOAP 
session 
Skill assessment 
(Short case / OSCE) 
 
GM 16.6 Distinguish between diarrhea and dysentery based on cli nical 
features 
K KH Y Bedside clinic, SGT Skill assessment 
(Short case / OSCE ) 
Viva Voce 
 
GM 16.7 Generate a differential diagnosis based on the presenting symptoms 
and clinical features and prioritize based on the most likely 
diagnosis 
K KH Y Bedside clinic, SGT Skill assessment 
(Long/short case) 
Viva voce

67  
Number COMPETENCY 
The student should be able to 
Predominant 
Domain 
K/S/A/C 
Level 
K/KH/S 
H/P 
Core 
(Y/N) 
Suggested Teaching 
Learning method 
Suggested 
Assessment 
method 
Number 
required 
to certify 
P 
GM 16.8 Choose and interpret diagnostic tests based on the clinical diagnosis 
including complete blood count, and stool examination in a pati ent 
with acute/chronic diarrhea 
S SH Y Bedside clinic, SGT 
Tutorial 
Skill assessment 
(OSCE/ viva Voce) 
 
GM 16.9 Identify common parasitic causes of diarrhea under the microscope 
in a stool specimen 
S SH Y DOAP Skill assessment 
OSCE 
 
GM 16.10 Identify vibrio cholera in a hanging drop specimen S S H Y DOAP Skill assessment 
OSCE 
 
GM 16.11 Enumerate the indications for stool cultures and blood cultures in 
patients with acute diarrhea 
K KH Y LGT 
SGT 
Application based 
questions / 
Viva voce 
 
GM 16.12 Enumerate and discuss the indications for further investigation s 
including antibodies, colonoscopy, diagnostic Imaging and biopsy in 
the diagnosis of chronic diarrhea 
K KH Y LGT 
SGT 
Application based 
questions / 
Viva voce 
 
GM 16.13 Describe and enumerate the indications, pharmacology and side 
effects of pharmacotherapy for parasitic causes of diarrhea 
K KH Y LGT 
SGT 
Application based 
questions / 
Viva voce 
 
GM 16.14 Describe and enumerate the indications, pharmacology and side 
effects of pharmacotherapy for bacterial and viral diarrhea 
K KH Y LGT 
SGT 
Application based 
questions / 
Viva voce 
 
GM 16.15 Distinguish based on the clinical presentation Crohn’s  disease from 
Ulcerative Colitis 
K KH Y LGT 
SGT 
Application based 
questions / 
Viva voce 
 
GM 16.16 Describe and enumerate the indications, pharmacology a nd side 
effects of pharmacotherapy including Immunotherapy in a patient  
with chronic diarrhea 
K KH Y LGT 
SGT 
Application based 
questions / 
Viva voce 
 
GM 16.17 Describe and enumerate the indications for surgery in inflammatory 
bowel disease 
K KH Y LGT 
SGT 
Application based 
questions / 
Viva voce 
 
Topic 17: Headache                                                Number of competencies: (14)                                                  Number of competencies that require certification : ( 01) 
GM 17.1 Define and classify headache and describe the presentin g features, K KH Y LGT Application based

68  
Number COMPETENCY 
The student should be able to 
Predominant 
Domain 
K/S/A/C 
Level 
K/KH/S 
H/P 
Core 
(Y/N) 
Suggested Teaching 
Learning method 
Suggested 
Assessment 
method 
Number 
required 
to certify 
P 
 precipitating factors, aggravating and relieving factors of var ious 
kinds of headache 
   SGT question/ Viva voice  
GM 17.2 Elicit and document and present an appropriate history includin g 
aura, precipitating aggravating and relieving factors, associat ed 
symptoms that help identify the cause of headaches 
S SH Y Bedside clinic 
SGT 
Skill assessment 
OSCE 
 
GM 17.3 Classify migraine and describe the distinguishing features between 
classical and non-classical forms of migraine 
K KH Y LGT 
SGT 
Application based 
question/ Viva voice 
 
GM 17.4 Demonstrate a detailed neurologic examination in a patient of 
headache  and  raised  intracranial  tension  including  signs  o f  
meningitis 
S SH Y Bedside clinic 
SGT 
Long case/ Short 
case Skill 
assessment, OSCE 
 
GM 17.5 Generate, document and present a differential diagnosis based on 
clinical features in a patient with headache. 
S SH Y Bedside clinic 
SGT 
Long case/ Short 
case Skill 
assessment, OSCE 
 
GM 17.6 Choose and interpret diagnostic testing including Imaging based on 
clinical diagnosis in a patient with headache 
S SH Y Bedside clinic 
SGT 
Skill assessment 
OSCE 
Viva voce 
 
GM17.7 Enumerate the indication of lumbar puncture and describe  t h e  
findings in CSF in different types of meningitis. 
K KH Y LGT 
SGT 
Application based 
question/ Viva voice 
 
GM17.8 Demonstrate in a mannequin or equivalent the correct technique 
for performing a lumbar puncture 
S SH Y DOAP 
Skills lab 
Skill assessment 
OSCE 
 
GM17.9 Interpret the CSF findings with various parameters in a given CSF 
fluid analysis report 
S SH Y Bedside clinic 
SGT 
Skill assessment 
OSCE, Viva voce 
2 
GM17.10 Enumerate the indications for emergency care admission and 
describe Immediate supportive care in patients with headache 
K KH Y LGT 
SGT 
Application based 
question/ Viva voice 
 
GM17.11 Describe  the indications, pharmacology, dose, side effects of 
abortive therapy in migraine 
K KH Y LGT 
SGT 
Application based 
question/ Viva voice 
 
GM17.12 Describe the indications, pharmacology, dose, side effects of 
prophylactic therapy in migraine 
K KH Y LGT 
SGT 
Application based 
question/ Viva voice 
 
GM17.13 Describe the pharmacology, dose, adverse reactions and regimens 
of drugs used in the treatment of bacterial, tubercular and vir al 
meningitis 
K KH Y LGT 
SGT 
Application based 
question/ Viva voice

69  
Number COMPETENCY 
The student should be able to 
Predominant 
Domain 
K/S/A/C 
Level 
K/KH/S 
H/P 
Core 
(Y/N) 
Suggested Teaching 
Learning method 
Suggested 
Assessment 
method 
Number 
required 
to certify 
P 
GM17.14 Counsel patients with migraine and tension headache on lifestyle 
changes and need for prophylactic therapy 
A/C SH Y Bedside clinicDOAP Skill assessment 
OSCE 
 
Topic 18 : Cerebrovascular Accident                                                     Number of competencies: (16 )          Number of competencies that require certification : (01) 
GM 18.1 Describe the functional and the vascular anatomy of the  brain K KH Y LGT, SGT Application based 
question 
/Viva voce 
 
GM 18.2 Classify cerebrovascular accidents and describe the aetiology, 
predisposing genetic and acquired risk factors and pathogenesis  of 
haemorrhagic and non-haemorrhagic stroke 
K KH Y LGT, SGT Application based 
question 
/Viva voce 
 
GM 18.3 Elicit and document and present an appropriate history in a 
cerebrovascular patient including onset, progression, precipita ting 
and aggravating relieving factors , associated symptoms that hel p 
identify the cause of the cerebrovascular accidents 
S SH Y Bedside clinic, 
SGT 
Long case /Short 
case 
Skills assessment 
OSCE 
 
GM 18.4 Perform, demonstrate & documen t  p h y s i c a l  e x a m i n a t i o n  t h a t  
includes general and a detailed neurologic examination as 
appropriate, based on the history in a stroke patient 
S SH Y Bedside clinic, DOAP Long case /Short 
case 
Skills assessment 
OSCE 
3 
GM 18.5 Distinguish the lesion based on upper verses lower motor neuron , 
side, site and most probable nature of the lesion in a given pa tient 
with neurological symptoms/signs 
K 
S 
KH 
SH 
Y LGT 
Bedside clinic, DOAP 
Application based 
question 
Long case /Short 
case, Skills 
assessment, OSCE 
 
GM 18.6 Elicit, document and present clinical examination of a stroke patient 
with speech disorder. 
Enumerate and describe the points for distinguishing the variou s 
disorders of speech based on site of lesion. 
K 
S 
KH 
SH 
Y Bedside clinic, DOAP Application based 
question 
Long case /Short 
case, Skills 
assessment, OSCE 
 
GM18.7 Describe and distinguish, based on the clinical presentation, t he 
types of bladder dysfunction seen in neurological diseases 
K KH Y LGT 
Bedside clinic, 
SGT 
Application based 
question /Viva voice 
 
GM18.8 Choose and interpret the appropriate Imaging tests that will identify 
the anatomical site, type and etiology of the lesion in stroke patient 
S SH Y Bedside clinic, 
SGT 
Skill assessment 
OSCE, Viva voce

70  
Number COMPETENCY 
The student should be able to 
Predominant 
Domain 
K/S/A/C 
Level 
K/KH/S 
H/P 
Core 
(Y/N) 
Suggested Teaching 
Learning method 
Suggested 
Assessment 
method 
Number 
required 
to certify 
P 
GM18.9 Choose and interpret the appropriate diagnostic testing in youn g 
patients with a cerebrovascular accident (CVA) 
S SH Y Bedside clinic, 
SGT 
Skill assessment 
OSCE 
Viva voce 
 
GM 18.10 Describe the initial supportive management of a patien t presenting 
with a cerebrovascular accident (CVA) 
K KH Y LGT 
SGT 
Application based 
question /Viva voice 
 
GM 18.11 Describe management of non-haemorrhagic stroke including use of 
thrombolytic agents. Enumerate the indications and
contraindications of thrombolytic agents in a stroke patient 
K KH Y LGT 
SGT 
Application based 
question /Viva voice 
 
GM 18.12 Enumerate the indications and contraindications of ant iplatelet 
agents in non-haemorrhagic stroke. 
Describe the role of antiplatelet agents in stroke patients. 
K KH Y LGT 
SGT 
Application based 
question /Viva voice 
 
GM 18.13 Describe the management of a patient with haemorrhagic  stroke. K KH Y LGT 
SGT 
Application based 
question /Viva voice 
 
GM 18.14 Enumerate the indications for surgery in a haemorrhagi c stroke K K Y LGT 
SGT 
Written 
/Viva voice 
 
GM 18.15 Enumerate and describe the indications and modalities of 
multidisciplinary rehabilitation of patients with a CVA 
K KH Y LGT ,SGT, 
Bedside clinic 
Application based 
question /Viva voice 
 
GM 18.16 Counsel regarding diagnosis, therapy, prognosis and outcome to 
patient with stroke and his/her family members in an empathetic  
manner 
A/C SH Y Bedside clinic 
DOAP 
Skill assessment 
OSCE 
 
Topic 19: Movement Disorders Number of competencies: (09) Numbe r of competencies that require certification : ( NIL) 
GM 19.1 Describe the functional n euro-anatomy of the locomotor system of 
the brain 
K KH Y LGT, 
SGT 
Application based 
question 
/Viva voce 
 
GM 19.2 Classify movement disorders of the brain based on distr ibution, 
rhythm, repetition, exacerbating and relieving factor 
K KH Y LGT, 
SGT 
Application based 
question 
/Viva voce 
 
GM 19.3 Elicit and document and present an appropriate history including 
onset, progression precipitating,  aggravating and relieving fac tors, 
associated symptoms that help identify the cause of the movement 
S SH Y Bedside clinic 
SGT 
Short case 
Skill assessment 
OSCE

71  
Number COMPETENCY 
The student should be able to 
Predominant 
Domain 
K/S/A/C 
Level 
K/KH/S 
H/P 
Core 
(Y/N) 
Suggested Teaching 
Learning method 
Suggested 
Assessment 
method 
Number 
required 
to certify 
P 
 disorder       
GM 19.4 Perform, demonstrate and document a physical examination that 
includes  a  general  examination  and  a  detailed  neurologic  
examination using standard movement rating scales 
S SH Y Bedside clinic 
SGT 
Short case 
Skill assessment 
OSCE 
 
GM 19.5 Generate, document and p resent a differential diagnosis based on 
the history and physical examination in a patient with movement  
disorder 
S SH Y Bedside clinic 
SGT 
Short case 
Skill assessment 
OSCE 
 
GM 19.6 Document and describe clinical diagnosis regarding the anatomic al 
location, nature and cause of the lesion based on the clinical 
presentation and physical examination in a patient with movement 
disorder 
S SH Y Bedside clinic 
SGT 
Short case 
Skill assessment 
OSCE 
 
GM 19.7 Choose and interpret diagnostic Imaging tests in the di agnosis of 
movement disorder 
S SH Y Bedside clinic 
SGT 
Short case 
Skill assessment 
OSCE, Viva voce 
 
GM 19.8 Discuss and describe the  pharmacology, their dose, side  effects and 
interactions of the drugs used in the management of Parkinson’s  
syndrome 
K KH Y LGT, SGT Application based 
question 
/Viva voce 
 
GM 19. 9 Enumerate the indications for use of surgery and botulinum toxin in 
the treatment of movement disorders 
K KH Y LGT, SGT Written/Viva voce  
Topic 20: Seizure Disorders                                    Number of competencies: (05)                                    Number of competencies that require certification : (NIL ) 
GM 20.1 Define and differentiate between seizures, convulsions and  
epilepsy. 
K K Y LGT 
SGT 
Application based 
question, 
Viva voce 
 
GM 20.2 Enumerate the etiological classification of epilepsy. Discuss t he 
pathophysiology, clinical evaluation and diagnosis of epilepsy 
including description of how to recognize different types of epilepsy. 
Enumerate and discuss the diagnostic tests in epilepsy. 
K KH Y LGT 
SGT 
Application based 
question, 
Viva voce 
 
GM20.3 Discuss the management of epilepsy including various antiepilep tic 
medications, their usage and drug interactions. 
K KH Y LGT 
SGT 
Application based 
question, Viva voce 
 
GM 20.4 Counsel the patient and relatives regarding the safety precautions 
to be taken during and after an episode of seizure. Demonstrate  
S/A/C SH Y Bedside clinic 
DOAP 
Skills assessment 
OSCE

72  
Number COMPETENCY 
The student should be able to 
Predominant 
Domain 
K/S/A/C 
Level 
K/KH/S 
H/P 
Core 
(Y/N) 
Suggested Teaching 
Learning method 
Suggested 
Assessment 
method 
Number 
required 
to certify 
P 
 p a t i e n t   e d u c a t i o n   o n   l i f e s t y l e   m o d i f i c a t i o n s   i n c l u d i n g   s leep 
patterns, stress management, alcohol or drug avoidance. 
   Role play   
GM 20.5 Discuss acute management  of seizure episode K KH Y LGT,  
SGT 
Application based 
question, Viva voce 
 
Topic 21: Envenomation                                                    Number of competencies: (09)                        Number of competencies that require certification : (NIL ) 
GM21.1 Enumerate the local poisonous snakes and describe the
distinguishing marks of each 
K K/ 
KH 
Y LGT 
SGT 
MCQ/Written/ Viva 
voce 
 
GM21.2 Describe and demonstrate in a volunteer or a mannequin a nd 
educate (to other health care workers/patients) the correct ini tial 
management of patient with a snake bite in the field 
K 
S 
KH 
SH 
Y LGT 
SGT 
DOAP 
Skill assessment 
OSCE 
Viva voce 
 
GM21.3 Describe the initial approach to the stabilisation of th e patient who 
presents with snake bite 
K KH Y LGT 
SGT 
Application based 
question / Viva voce 
 
GM21.4 Elicit  and document and present an appropriate history, the 
c i r c u m s t a n c e s ,  t i m e ,  k i n d  o f  s n a k e ,  e v o l u t i o n  o f  s y m p t o m s  i n  a  
patient with snake bite 
S SH Y Bedside clinic, DOAP Skill assessment 
OSCE 
Viva voce 
 
GM21.5 Perform a systematic examination, document and present a physical 
examination that includes general examination, local examinatio n, 
appropriate cardiac and neurologic examination in a patient wit h 
snake bite 
S SH Y Bedside clinic, DOAP Skill assessment 
OSCE 
Viva voce 
 
GM21.6 Choose and interpret the appropriate diagnostic tests in  p a t i e n t s  
with snake bite 
S SH Y Bedside clinic 
SGT 
Skill assessment 
OSCE 
/ Viva voce 
 
GM21.7 Enumerate the indications and describe the pharmacology,  d o s e ,  
adverse reactions, hypersensitivity reactions of anti-snake venom 
K KH Y LGTSGT Written/MCQ / Viva 
voce 
 
GM21.8 Describe the diagnosis, initial approach, stabilisation and therapy of 
scorpion envenomation 
K KH Y LGTSGT Written/MCQ 
/ Viva voce 
 
GM21.9 Describe the diagnosis, initial approach, stabilisation and therapy of 
bee sting and other envenomation 
K KH N LGTSGT Written/ MCQ 
/ Viva voce 
 
Topic 22: Poisoning                                                          Number of competencies: (13)                       Number of competencies that require certification : ( NIL) 
GM22.1 Describe the initial approach to the stabilisation of the patie nt who 
presents with poisoning 
K KH Y LGT, SGT Application based 
question, Viva voce

73  
Number COMPETENCY 
The student should be able to 
Predominant 
Domain 
K/S/A/C 
Level 
K/KH/S 
H/P 
Core 
(Y/N) 
Suggested Teaching 
Learning method 
Suggested 
Assessment 
method 
Number 
required 
to certify 
P 
GM22.2 Enumerate the common plant poisons seen in your area and 
describe their toxicology, clinical features, prognosis and spe cific 
approach to detoxification 
K K 
KH 
Y LGT, SGT MCQ/Written, Viva 
voce 
 
GM 22.3 Enumerate the common corrosives used in your area and d escribe 
their toxicology, clinical features, prognosis and approach to therapy 
K KH Y LGT, SGT MCQ/Written, Viva 
voce 
 
GM 22.4 Enumerate the commonly observed drug overdose in your a rea and 
describe their toxicology, clinical features, prognosis and app roach 
to therapy 
K KH Y LGT, SGT MCQ/ Written, Viva 
voce 
 
GM22.5 Identify and describe a pathophysiologic pattern or toxic syndr ome 
(toxidrome) based on the observed findings 
K KH Y LGT, SGT Application based 
question, Viva voce 
 
GM22.6 Describe and discuss the toxicology, clinical features, complications, 
prognosis and specific approach to management of common 
insecticide poisoning (Organophosphate and carbamate poisoning). 
K KH Y LGT, SGT MCQ/Written, Viva 
voce 
 
GM22.7 Describe and discuss the clinical features,  prognosis and 
management  of  aluminium  phosphide  and zinc  phosphide
poisoning. 
K KH Y LGT, SGT MCQ/Written, Viva 
voce 
 
GM22.8 Describe and discuss the clinical features, prognosis an d
management of Methanol and Ethylene glycol poisoning 
K KH Y LGT, SGT MCQ/Written, Viva 
voce 
 
GM22.9 Observe and describe the functions and role of a poison centre in 
suspected poisoning 
K KH Y Centre visit - 
SGT 
Log book 
documentation 
Viva voce 
 
GM22.10 Describe the medico legal aspects of suspected suicidal or homicidal 
poisoning 
K KH Y LGT, SGT, Written 
Viva voce 
 
GM22.11 Demonstrate the correct procedure to write a medico leg al report 
on a suspected poisoning 
S SH Y DOAP 
SGT 
Skill assessment 
OSCE 
 
GM22.12 Counsel family members of a patient with suspected pois oning 
about the clinical and medico legal aspects with empathy 
A/C SH Y DOAP Skill assessment 
OSCE 
 
GM22.13 Enumerate the indications for psychiatric consultation and describe 
the precautions to be taken in a patient with suspected suicida l 
ideation / gesture 
K KH Y SGT MCQ/Written Viva 
voce 
 
Topic 23: Mineral, Fluid Electrolyte and Acid base Disorder                                       Number of competencies: (12)                Number of competencies that require certificati on : (NIL )

74  
Number COMPETENCY 
The student should be able to 
Predominant 
Domain 
K/S/A/C 
Level 
K/KH/S 
H/P 
Core 
(Y/N) 
Suggested Teaching 
Learning method 
Suggested 
Assessment 
method 
Number 
required 
to certify 
P 
GM 23.1 Enumerate the causes of hypercalcemia and distinguish the features 
of PTH vs non PTH mediated 
hypercalcemia 
K KH Y LGT, SGT Written/ Viva voce  
GM 23.2 Describe the aetiology, clinical manifestations, diagno sis and clinical 
approach to primary hyperparathyroidism 
K KH Y LGT, SGT Written/ Viva voce  
GM 23.3 Describe the approach to the management of hypercalcemi a K KH Y LGT, SGT Written/ Viva voce  
GM 23.4 Enumerate the causes and describe the clinical features and the 
correct approach to the diagnosis and management for a patient 
with hyponatremia 
K KH Y LGT, SGT Written/ Viva voce  
GM 23.5 Enumerate the causes and describe the clinical and laboratory 
features and the correct approach to the diagnosis and 
management of the patient t with hyponatremia 
K KH Y LGT, SGT Written/ Viva voce  
GM 23.6 Enumerate the causes and describe the clinical and laboratory 
features and the correct approach to the diagnosis and 
management of the patient with hypokalemia 
K KH Y LGT, SGT Written/ Viva voce  
GM 23.7 Enumerate the causes and describe the clinical and labo ratory 
features and the correct approach to the diagnosis and 
management of the patient with hyperkalemia 
K KH Y LGT, SGT Written/ Viva 
voce/application 
based questions 
 
GM 23.8 Enumerate the causes and describe the clinical and laboratory 
features of metabolic acidosis 
K KH Y LGT, SGT Written/ Viva 
voce/application 
based questions 
 
GM 23.9 Enumerate the causes and describe the clinical and labo ratory 
features of metabolic alkalosis 
K KH Y LGT, SGT Written/ Viva 
voce/MCQ 
 
GM 23.10 Enumerate the causes and describe the clinical and lab oratory 
features of respiratory acidosis 
K KH Y LGT, SGT Written/ Viva 
voce/MCQ 
 
GM 23.11 Enumerate the causes and describe the clinical and lab oratory 
features of respiratory alkalosis 
K KH Y LGT, SGT Written/ Viva 
voce/MCQ 
 
GM 23.12 Identify the underlying acid-based disorder based on a n ABG report 
and interpret it in the context of clinical situation 
K KH Y LGT, SGT Written/ Viva 
voce/MCQ 
 
Topic: 24    Nutritional and Vitamin Deficiencies                                               Number of competencies: (05)                           Number of competencies that require ce rtification : ( NIL) 
GM 24.1 Discuss and describe the methods of nutritional assessm ent in K KH Y LGT, SGT Application

75  
Number COMPETENCY 
The student should be able to 
Predominant 
Domain 
K/S/A/C 
Level 
K/KH/S 
H/P 
Core 
(Y/N) 
Suggested Teaching 
Learning method 
Suggested 
Assessment 
method 
Number 
required 
to certify 
P 
 anadultandcalculationofcaloricrequirementsduringillnesses     based 
questions/Written/ 
Vivavoce 
 
GM 24.2 Discuss and describe the  causes and consequences of proteincaloric 
malnutrition in the hospital 
K KH Y LGT, SGT Written/ Vivavoce  
GM 24.3 Discuss and describe the aetiology, causes, clinical manifestat ions, 
complications, diagnosis and management of common 
vitamindeficiencies 
K KH Y LGT, SGT Application 
based 
questions/Written/ 
Vivavoce 
 
GM 24.4 Enumerate the indications for enteral and parenteral nu trition 
incriticallyill patients 
K KH Y LGT, SGT Written/ Vivavoce  
GM 24.5 Counsel and communicate to patients in a simulated envi ronment on  
an appropriate balanced diet 
S SH Y DOAP Skill 
assessment/OSCE 
 
Topic 25: Geriatrics                                                                                       Number of competencies: (22)          Number of competencies that require certific ation : ( NIL) 
GM 25.1 Describe and discuss the epidemiology, pathogenesis, clinical 
evolution, presentation and course of common diseases in the 
elderly 
K KH Y LGT, SGT Written/viva voice  
GM 25.2 Describe the multidimensional geriatric assessments that includ es 
medical, psycho-social and functional components 
K K Y Bedside clinic, DOAP Skill assessment 
/OSCE 
 
GM 25.3 Describe and discuss the etiopathogenesis, clinical pre sentation, 
identification, functional changes, acute care, stabilization,
management and rehabilitation of acute confusional states 
K KH Y LGT, SGT Written/viva voice  
GM 25.4 Describe and discuss the etiopath ogenesis, clinical presentatio n, 
identification, functional changes, acute care, stabilization,
management and rehabilitation of vascular events in the elderly 
K KH Y LGT, SGT Written/viva voice  
GM 25.5 Describe and discuss the etiopath ogenesis, clinical presentatio n, 
identification, functional changes, acute care, stabilization,
management and rehabilitation of depression in the elderly 
K KH Y LGT, SGT Written/viva voice  
GM 25.6 Describe the etiopathogenesis and clinical presentation  of dementia 
in the elderly. 
D e s c r i b e  t h e  a c u t e  c a r e ,  s t a b i l i z a t i o n ,  m a n a g e m e n t  a n d
rehabilitation of dementia in elderly 
K KH Y LGT, 
SGT 
Written/viva voice

76  
Number COMPETENCY 
The student should be able to 
Predominant 
Domain 
K/S/A/C 
Level 
K/KH/S 
H/P 
Core 
(Y/N) 
Suggested Teaching 
Learning method 
Suggested 
Assessment 
method 
Number 
required 
to certify 
P 
GM25.7 Describe and discuss the aetiopat hogenesis, clinical presentati on, 
identification, functional changes, acute care, stabilization, 
management and rehabilitation of personality changes in the 
Elderly 
K KH N LGT, SGT Written/viva voice  
GM25.8 Describe and discuss the aetiopathogenesis, clinical pre sentation, 
identification, functional changes, acute care, stabilization,
management and rehabilitation of osteoporosis in the elderly 
K KH Y LGT, SGT Written/viva voice  
GM25.9 Describe and discuss the aetiopat hogenesis clinical presentatio n, 
identification, functional changes, acute care, stabilization,
management and rehabilitation of CVA in the elderly 
K KH Y LGT, SGT Written/viva voice  
GM25.10 Describe and discuss the etiopath ogenesis, clinical presentatio n, 
identification, functional changes, acute care, stabilization,
management and rehabilitation of COPD in the elderly 
K KH Y LGT, 
SGT 
Written/viva voice  
GM25.11 D e s c r i b e  a n d  d i s c u s s  t h e  f u n c t i o n a l  c h a n g e s ,  a c u t e  c a r e ,  
stabilization,  management  and  rehabilitation  of  the  elder ly 
undergoing surgery 
K KH Y LGT, SGT Written/viva voice  
GM25.12 Describe and discuss the etiopathogenesis, clinical pre sentation, 
identification, functional changes, acute care, stabilization,
management and rehabilitation of degenerative joint disease 
K KH Y LGT, SGT Written/viva voice  
GM25.13 Describe and discuss the etiopathogenesis, clinical pre sentation, 
identification, functional changes, acute care, stabilization, 
management and rehabilitation of falls in the elderly 
K KH Y LGT, SGT Written/viva voice  
GM25.14 Describe and discuss the aetiopathogenesis, clinical pr esentation, 
identification, functional changes, acute care, stabilization, 
management and rehabilitation of common fractures in the elderly 
K KH Y LGT, 
SGT 
Written/viva voice  
GM25.15 Describe and discuss the aetiopat hogenesis, clinical presentati on, 
identification, functional changes, acute care, stabilization, 
management and rehabilitation of vision abnormalities and visua l 
loss in the elderly 
K KH Y LGT, 
SGT 
Written/viva voice  
G M 2 5 . 1 6  D e s c r i b e   a n d   d i s c u s s   t h e   p r i n c i p l e s   o f   p h y s i c a l   a n d   s o c i a l  
rehabilitation, functional assessment, role of physiotherapy an d 
occupational therapy in the management of disability in the elderly 
K KH Y LGT, 
SGT 
Written/viva voice

77  
Number COMPETENCY 
The student should be able to 
Predominant 
Domain 
K/S/A/C 
Level 
K/KH/S 
H/P 
Core 
(Y/N) 
Suggested Teaching 
Learning method 
Suggested 
Assessment 
method 
Number 
required 
to certify 
P 
GM25.17 Describe and discuss the aetiopat hogenesis, clinical presentati on, 
identification, functional changes, acute care, stabilization,
management and rehabilitation of hearing loss in the elderly 
K KH Y LGT, SGT Written/viva voice  
GM25.18 Describe the Impact of the demographic changes in agein g on the 
population 
K KH Y LGT, SGT Written/viva voice  
GM25.19 Enumerate and describe the social problems in the elder ly including 
isolation, abuse, change in family structure and their impact o n 
Health 
K KH Y LGT, SGT Written/viva voice  
GM25.20 Enumerate and describe social interventions in the care  of elderly 
including domiciliary services, rehabilitation facilities, old age 
homes and state interventions 
K KH Y LGT, 
SGT 
Written/viva voice  
GM25.21 Enumerate and describe ethical issues in the care of th e elderly K KH Y LGT, 
SGT 
Written/viva voice  
GM25.22 Describe and discuss the aetiopat hogenesis, clinical presentati on, 
complications, assessment and management of nutritional
disorders in the elderly 
K KH Y LGT, SGT Written/viva voice  
Topic 26: Infectious Diseases                                                                            Number of competencies: (35)                        Number of competencies that requ ire certification : ( NIL) 
GM 26.1 Describe and discuss the molecular mechanisms of microb ial 
pathogenesis. 
K KH Y LGT 
SGT 
Application based 
question, 
Viva voce 
 
GM26.2 Discuss the approach to a patient with an Infectious Dis ease. K KH Y LGT 
SGT 
Application based 
question 
Viva voce 
 
GM 26.3 Elicit document and present a medical history that helps deline ate 
the aetiology of infectious diseases that includes the evolutio n and 
pattern of symptoms, risk factors, exposure through occupation and 
Travel 
S SH Y Bedside clinic, DOAP Skill assessment 
OSCE 
 
GM 26.4 Perform a systematic examination that establishes the d iagnosis and 
severity of presentation that in cludes: general skin, mucosal a nd 
lymph node examination, chest and abdominal examination 
(including examination of the liver and spleen) 
S SH Y Bedside clinic, DOAP Skill assessment 
OSCE

78  
Number COMPETENCY 
The student should be able to 
Predominant 
Domain 
K/S/A/C 
Level 
K/KH/S 
H/P 
Core 
(Y/N) 
Suggested Teaching 
Learning method 
Suggested 
Assessment 
method 
Number 
required 
to certify 
P 
GM 26.5 Order and interpret diagnostic tests based on the differential 
diagnosis including: CBC with differential, blood biochemistry,  
peripheral smear, urinary analysis with sediment, Chest X ray, blood 
and urine cultures, sputum gram stain and cultures, sputum AFB 
and cultures, CSF analysis, pleural and body fluid analysis, stool 
K KH Y LGT 
Bedside clinic, DOAP 
Skill assessment 
OSCE 
 
GM 26.6 Enumerate  and describe  the indications for use of newer 
techniques in the diagnosis of these infections 
K K 
KH 
Y LGT, SGT MCQ/Written 
/ Viva voce 
 
GM 26.7 Discuss the approach to the Acutely Ill Infected Febrile Patient K KH Y LGT, SGT Application based 
question, Viva voce 
 
GM 26.8 Describe and discuss the common causes, clinical featur es and 
management of infections of the Skin, Muscles and Soft Tissues. 
K KH Y LGT, SGT Application based 
question, Viva voce 
 
GM 26.9 Describe and discuss the common causes, clinical features and 
management of liver and other Visceral abscesses. 
K KH Y LGT, SGT Application based 
question 
/ Viva voce 
 
GM 26.10 Describe and discuss the common causes, clinical features and 
management of acute infectious d iarrheal diseases and bacterial  
food poisoning. 
K KH Y LGT, SGT Application based 
question 
/ Viva voce 
 
GM 26.11 Describe and discuss the common causes, clinical featu res and 
management of  Urinary  Tract Infections, Pyelonephritis, and 
Prostatitis. 
K KH Y LGT, SGT Application based 
question 
/ Viva voce 
 
GM 26.12 Describe and discuss the common causes, clinical features and 
management of encephalitis and meningitis. 
K KH Y LGT, SGT Application based 
question 
/ Viva voce 
 
GM 26.13 Describe and discuss the etiology, pathogenesis, clini cal features 
and management of Clostridial infections like tetanus, botulism and 
gas gangrene. 
K KH Y LGT, SGT Application based 
question 
/ Viva voce 
 
GM26.14 Describe and discuss the common causes, clinical features and 
management OF diseases caused by Gram-Negative Enteric Bacilli. 
K KH N LGT, SGT Application based 
question 
/ Viva voce 
 
GM26.15 Describe and discuss the etiopathogenesis, clinical fea tures, 
complications and management of Helicobacter pylori Infections. 
K KH Y LGT, SGT Application based 
question 
/ Viva voce

79  
Number COMPETENCY 
The student should be able to 
Predominant 
Domain 
K/S/A/C 
Level 
K/KH/S 
H/P 
Core 
(Y/N) 
Suggested Teaching 
Learning method 
Suggested 
Assessment 
method 
Number 
required 
to certify 
P 
GM26.16 Describe and discuss the clinical  f e a t u r e s ,  c o m p l i c a t i o n s  a n d  
management OF infections due to Pseudomonas and Burkholderia 
Species. 
K KH N LGT, SGT MCQ/Written 
/ Viva voce 
 
GM26.17 Describe and discuss the etiopath ogenesis, clinical features, 
complications and management of enteric fever. 
K KH Y LGT, SGT Application based 
question 
/ Viva voce 
 
GM26.18 Describe and discuss the  common causes, etiopathogenesis, clinical 
features and management of bacterial zoonotic diseases like 
Leptospirosis, Brucellosis, Plague and Anthrax. 
K KH Y LGT, SGT Application based 
question 
/ Viva voce 
 
GM26.19 Describe and discuss the pathog enesis, clinical features and 
management of common diseases caused by Actinomycosis and 
Nocardia. 
K KH Y LGT, SGT MCQ/Written 
/ Viva voce 
 
GM26.20 Describe and discuss the pathog enesis, clinical features and 
management of Rickettsial diseases especially of typhus group 
(Scrub typhus, epidemic typhus and endemic typhus). 
K KH N LGT, SGT MCQ/Written / Viva 
voce 
 
GM26.21 Describe and discuss the etiopath ogenesis, clinical features, 
complications and management of Herpes Simplex Virus Infections. 
K KH Y LGT, SGT MCQ/Written 
/ Viva voce 
 
GM26.22 Describe  and  discuss  the  etiopathogenesis,  clinica l  features, 
complications and management of Varicella-Zoster Virus Infections 
K KH Y LGT, SGT MCQ/Written 
/ Viva voce 
 
GM26.23 Describe and discuss the etiopathogenesis, clinical fea tures, 
complications and management of Common Viral Respiratory 
Infections, Including COVID-19, SARS, Influenza. 
K KH Y LGT, SGT MCQ/Written 
/ Viva voce 
 
GM26.24 Describe  and  discuss  the  etiopathogenesis,  clinica l  features, 
management and prevention of Rabies. 
K KH Y LGT, SGT MCQ/Written 
/ Viva voce 
 
GM26.25 Describe  and  discuss  the  etiopathogenesis,  clinica l  features, 
complications and management of Dengue. 
K KH Y LGT, SGT Application based 
question, Viva voce 
 
GM26.26 Describe and discuss the etiopathogenesis, clinical fea tures and 
management of candidiasis. 
K KH N LGT, SGT MCQ/Written 
/ Viva voce 
 
GM26.27 Describe and discuss the etiopathogenesis, clinical fea tures, and 
management of Aspergillosis 
K KH N LGT, SGT MCQ/Written 
/ Viva voce 
 
GM26.28 Describe  and  discuss  the  etiopathogenesis,  clinica l  features, 
complications and management of Amebiasis. 
K KH Y LGT, SGT Application based 
question

80  
Number COMPETENCY 
The student should be able to 
Predominant 
Domain 
K/S/A/C 
Level 
K/KH/S 
H/P 
Core 
(Y/N) 
Suggested Teaching 
Learning method 
Suggested 
Assessment 
method 
Number 
required 
to certify 
P 
      / Viva voce  
G M 2 6 . 2 9  D e s c r i b e   a n d   d i s c u s s   t h e   e t i o p a t h o g e n e s i s ,   c l i n i c al  features, 
complications and management of Malaria 
K KH Y LGT, SGT Application based 
question, Viva voce 
 
GM26.30 Prescribe drugs for malaria based on the species identified, 
prevalence of drug resistance and national programs. 
K KH Y SGT Sill assessment  
GM26.31 Describe and discuss the etiopath ogenesis, clinical features an d 
management of Leishmaniasis. 
K KH Y LGT, SGT Application based 
question 
/ Viva voce 
 
GM 26.32 Describe and discuss the etiopathogenesis, clinical fe atures and 
management of Filarial disease. 
K KH Y LGT, SGT MCQ/Written 
/ Viva voce 
 
GM26.33 Describe  and  discuss  the  etiopathogenesis,  clinica l  features, 
complications and management of Cysticercosis. 
K KH N LGT, SGT MCQ/Written 
/ Viva voce 
 
GM26.34 Communicate to the patient and family the diagnosis and  treatment 
of identified infection 
C SH Y Bedside clinic 
DOAP 
Skill assessment 
OSCE 
 
GM26.35 Counsel the patient and family on prevention of various  infections 
due to environmental issues 
C SH Y Bedside clinic 
DOAP 
Skill assessment 
OSCE 
 
Topic 27: Tuberculosis                                                                         Number of competencies: (15)                            Number of competencies that require certification : (01) 
GM 27.1 Describe and discuss the epidemiology of tuberculosis and its 
impact on the work, life and economy of India 
K KH Y LGT, SGT Application based 
question, Viva voce 
 
GM 27.2 Describe and discuss the microbiology of tubercle bacillus, mod e of 
transmission, pathogenesis, clinical evolution and natural hist ory of 
pulmonary and extra pulmonary forms (including lymph node, bone 
and CNS) 
K KH Y LGT, 
SGT 
Application based 
question 
/ Viva voce 
 
GM 27.3 Discuss and describe the  impact of co-infection with HI V and other 
co-morbid conditions such as diabetes on the natural history of  
tuberculosis 
K KH Y LGT, 
SGT 
Application based 
question 
/ Viva voce 
 
GM 27.4 Describe the epidemiology, the predisposing factors, mi crobial and 
therapeutic factors that determine resistance to anti-tubercula r 
drugs 
K KH Y LGT, 
SGT 
Application based 
question 
/ Viva voce 
 
GM 27.5 Elicit, document and present an appropriate medical his tory that 
includes risk factor, contacts , symptoms including cough, fever , 
S SH Y Bed side clinic, DOAP 
session 
Short/long case , 
Skill assessment -

81  
Number COMPETENCY 
The student should be able to 
Predominant 
Domain 
K/S/A/C 
Level 
K/KH/S 
H/P 
Core 
(Y/N) 
Suggested Teaching 
Learning method 
Suggested 
Assessment 
method 
Number 
required 
to certify 
P 
 a n o r e x i a ,   w e i g h t   l o s s ,   h e m o p t y s i s   a n d   s y m p t o m s   o f   e x t r a - 
pulmonary manifestations 
    OSCE  
GM 27.6 Demonstrate and perform a systematic examination that establishes 
the diagnosis based on the clinical presentation that includes a a) 
general examination, b) examination of the chest and lung including 
loss of volume, mediastinal shift, percussion and auscultation of lung 
sounds and added sounds c) examination of the lymphatic 
system and d) relevant CNS examination 
S SH Y Bed side clinic, DOAP 
session 
Short/long case 
Skill assessment – 
OSCE 
 
GM 27.7 Interpret a PPD (Mantoux Test) and describe and discuss  t h e  
indications and pitfalls of the test 
K KH Y Bedside clinic, 
SGT 
MCQ/Written 
Viva voce 
 
GM 27.8 Generate a differential diagnosis based on the clinical history  a n d  
evolution of the disease that prioritizes the most likely diagn osis in 
patient  with  history/  examination  findings  suggestive  of 
Tuberculosis 
S SH Y Bedside clinic, Small 
group discussion 
Long case /short 
case, Skill 
assessment, OSCE 
 
GM 27.9 Order and interpret diagnostic tests based on the clini cal 
presentation in patient with history/ examination findings suggestive 
of Tuberculosis including: CBC, Chest X ray PA view, Mantoux Te st, 
sputum smear, culture and sensitivity, pleural fluid 
examination and culture, HIV testing 
K 
S 
KH 
SH 
Y Bedside clinic, DOAP 
session 
Long case /short 
case 
Skill assessment – 
OSCE, 
Viva voce 
 
GM 27.10 Interpret a sputum gram stain and AFB with antibiotic sensitivity 
test from a given report 
S  
SH 
Y DOAP 
Tutorial 
Skill assessment 
OSCE 
 
GM 27.11 Enumerate and describe the indications for tests including: serology, 
special cultures, Polymerase Cha in Reaction and anti-tubercular  
drug sensitivity testing 
K KH Y SGT, 
LGT 
Short note/ Viva 
voce 
 
GM 27.12 D e s c r i b e   a n d   d i s c u s s   t h e   o r i g i n ,   i n d i c a t i o n s ,   t e c h n i q u e   of 
administration, efficacy and complications of the BCG vaccine 
K KH Y LGT, SGT 
discussion 
Short note/ Viva 
Voce 
 
GM 27.13 Describe and discuss th e pharmacology of various anti-tuberculous 
agents, their indications, contraindications, interactions and adverse 
reactions 
K KH Y LGT, SGT 
discussion 
Short note/ Viva 
voce 
 
GM 27.14 Prescribe an appropriate anti-tuberculosis Regimen bas ed on the 
location of disease, smear positivity and negativity and 
comorbidities based on current national guidelines including 
K 
S 
KH 
SH 
Y LGT 
Bedside clinic, SGT, 
Application based 
question 
Skill assessment- 
2

82  
Number COMPETENCY 
The student should be able to 
Predominant 
Domain 
K/S/A/C 
Level 
K/KH/S 
H/P 
Core 
(Y/N) 
Suggested Teaching 
Learning method 
Suggested 
Assessment 
method 
Number 
required 
to certify 
P 
 directly observed tuberculosis therapy (DOTS)     OSCE, Viva voce  
GM 27.15 Describe the appropriate precautions, screening, testing and 
indications for chemoprophylaxis for contacts and exposed healt h 
care workers 
K KH Y LGT, SGT Application based 
question/ Viva voce 
 
GM 27.16 Define criteria for the  cure of Tuberculosis; describe and recognize 
t h e   f e a t u r e s   o f   d r u g - r e s i s t a n t   t u b e r c u l o s i s ,   p r e v e n t i o n   and 
therapeutic regimens 
K KH Y LGT, SGT Application based 
question/ 
Viva voce 
 
GM 27.17 Educate health care workers on National Program of Tuberculosis  
and administering and monitoring the DOTS program 
K 
C/S 
KH 
SH 
Y DOAP Skill assessment 
OSCE 
Viva voce 
 
GM 27.18 Communicate with patients and family in an empathetic manner 
about the diagnosis and therapy of tuberculosis. 
S SH Y Bedside clinic 
DOAP 
Skill assessment 
OSCE 
 
Topic 28: Obstructive Airway Diseases   Number of competencies: (26) Number of competencies that require  certification : ( 01)  
GM 28.1 Define and classify obstructive airway disease K K Y LG T, SGT MCQs/Written/ Viva 
Voce 
 
GM 28.2 Describe and discuss the epidemio logy, risk factors and evoluti on of 
obstructive airway disease 
K KH Y LGT, SGT Application based 
question/ Viva voce 
 
GM 28.3 Enumerate and describe the causes of acute episodes in patients  
with obstructive airway disease 
K KH Y LGT, SGT MCQ/ Application 
based question/ 
Viva voce 
 
GM 28.4 Describe and discuss the physiology and pathophysiology  of hypoxia 
and hypercapnia 
K KH Y LGT, SGT Application based 
question/ Viva voce 
 
GM 28.5 Describe and discuss the genetics of alpha 1 antitrypsi n deficiency in 
emphysema 
K KH N LGT, SGT Application based 
question/ Viva voce 
 
GM 28.6 Describe the role of the environment in the cause and e xacerbation 
of obstructive airway disease 
K KH Y LGT, SGT Application based 
question/ Viva voce 
 
GM 28.7 Describe  and  discuss  allergic 
obstructive airway disease 
and non-allergic precipitants of K KH Y LGT, SGT Application based 
question/ Viva voce 
 
GM 28.8 Elicit document and present a medical history that will differentiate 
the  aetiologies  of  obstructive  airway  disease,  severity  and 
precipitants 
S SH Y Bed side clinic, DOAP Long case/ short 
case Skill 
assessment, OSCE

83  
Number COMPETENCY 
The student should be able to 
Predominant 
Domain 
K/S/A/C 
Level 
K/KH/S 
H/P 
Core 
(Y/N) 
Suggested Teaching 
Learning method 
Suggested 
Assessment 
method 
Number 
required 
to certify 
P 
GM 28.9 Perform a systematic examination that establishes the diagnosis and 
severity that includes measureme nt of respiratory rate, level o f 
respiratory distress, effort tolerance, breath sounds, added sounds, 
identification of signs of consolidation, pleural effusion and 
pneumothorax 
S SH Y Bed side clinic, DOAP Long case/ short 
case 
Skill assessment 
OSCE 
 
GM 28.10 Generate a differential diagnosis and prioritise based on clini cal 
features that suggest a specific aetiology 
S SH Y Bed side clinic, DOAP 
session 
Long case/ short 
case, Skill 
assessment 
OSCE 
 
GM 28.11 Describe, discuss and interpret pulmonary function tes ts K 
S 
KH 
SH 
Y Bed side clinic, DOAP 
session 
MCQ/Written 
Skill assessment 
OSCE 
2 
GM 28.12 Perform and interpret peak expiratory flow rate S P Y Bed side clinic, DOAP 
session 
Documentation in 
logbook 
Skill assessment 
OSCE 
 
GM 28.13 Describe the appropriate diagnostic work up based on the presumed 
aetiology in patient with Obstructive Airway Disease 
S SH Y Bed side clinic, DOAP 
session 
Long case/ short 
case, Skill 
assessment 
Viva voce, OSCE 
 
GM 28.14 Enumerate the indications for and interpret the result s of : Pulse 
Oximetry, ABG, Chest Radiograph 
K KH Y Bed side clinic, SGT 
DOAP 
Session 
MCQ/ Written 
Skill assessment 
Viva voce 
OSCE 
 
GM 28.15 Discuss and describe therapies for OAD including bronc hodilators, 
leukotriene inhibitors, mast cell stabilizers, theophylline, inhaled and 
systemic steroids, oxygen and immunotherapy 
K KH Y LGT, SGT MCQ/ Written 
Viva voce 
 
GM 28.16 Describe and discuss the indications for vaccinations in OAD K KH Y LGT, SGT MCQ/ Written 
Viva voce 
 
GM 28.17 Develop a therapeutic plan including use of bronchodilators and  
inhaled corticosteroids 
K 
S 
KH 
SH 
Y Bed side clinic, SGT 
DOAP 
Session 
MCQ/ Written 
Skill assessment 
Viva voce

84  
Number COMPETENCY 
The student should be able to 
Predominant 
Domain 
K/S/A/C 
Level 
K/KH/S 
H/P 
Core 
(Y/N) 
Suggested Teaching 
Learning method 
Suggested 
Assessment 
method 
Number 
required 
to certify 
P 
      OSCE  
GM 28.18 Develop a management plan for acute exacerbations including 
bronchodilators, systemic steroids, Antimicrobial therapy 
K 
S 
KH 
SH 
Y Bed side clinic, SGT 
DOAP 
Session 
MCQ/ Written 
Skill assessment 
Viva voce 
OSCE 
 
GM 28.19 Describe and discuss th e principles and use of oxygen therapy in the 
hospital and at home 
K KH Y LGT, SGT MCQ/ Written 
Viva voce 
 
GM 28.20 Describe discuss and counsel pati ents appropriately on smoking 
cessation 
K 
C 
KH 
SH 
Y DOAP 
Role play 
Viva voce 
Skills assessment 
OSCE 
 
GM 28.21 Demonstrate and counsel  patient on the correct use of inhalers S 
C 
SH Y DOAP 
Role play 
Skill assessment 
OSCE 
 
GM 28.22 Communicate diagnosis, t reatment plan and subsequent f ollow up 
plan to patients 
S 
C 
SH Y DOAP 
Role play 
Skill assessment 
OSCE 
 
GM 28.23 Discuss and describe the impact of OAD on patient’s quality of life, 
wellbeing, work, family, society and workplace 
K KH Y LGT, SGT 
discussion 
Application based 
question/ 
Viva voce 
 
GM 28.24 Discuss and describe preventive measures to reduce OAD  i n  
workplaces 
K KH Y LGT, SGT 
discussion 
Application based 
question/ 
Viva voce 
 
GM 28.25 Demonstrate an understanding of  patient’s inability to change 
working, living and environmental factors that influence progression 
of airway disease 
A 
C 
SH Y SGT, 
Bedside clinics 
Role play 
Observation by 
faculty 
OSCE 
 
GM 28.26 Demonstrate an understanding for the difficulties faced by patients 
during smoking cessation 
A 
C 
SH Y SGT, 
Bedside clinics 
Role play 
Observation by 
faculty 
OSCE 
 
Topic 29: The role of the physician in the community                              Number of competencies: (26)                           Number of competencies that require certification : ( NIL) 
GM 29.1 Describe and discuss the role of non-maleficence as a guiding 
principle in patient care 
K KH Y Bedside clinic, SGT Application based 
questions/  Viva 
Voce

85  
Number COMPETENCY 
The student should be able to 
Predominant 
Domain 
K/S/A/C 
Level 
K/KH/S 
H/P 
Core 
(Y/N) 
Suggested Teaching 
Learning method 
Suggested 
Assessment 
method 
Number 
required 
to certify 
P 
GM 29.2 Describe and discuss the role of autonomy and shared responsibility 
as a guiding principle in patient care 
K KH Y Bedside clinic, SGT Application based 
questions/  Viva 
Voce 
 
GM 29.3 Describe and discuss the role of beneficence of a guiding principle in 
patient care 
K KH Y Bedside clinic, SGT Application based 
questions/  Viva 
Voce 
 
GM 29.4 Identify, discuss and defend medico-legal, sociocultura l, economic 
and ethical issues as it pertains to rights, equity and justice in access 
to health care 
K KH Y Bedside clinic, SGT Application based 
questions/  Viva 
Voce 
 
GM 29.5 Identify, discuss and defend medico-legal, socio-cultural and ethical 
issues as it pertains to decision making in health care includi ng 
advanced directives and surrogate decision making 
K KH Y SGT Application based 
questions/  Viva 
Voce 
 
GM 29.6 Identify, discuss and defend medico-legal, socio-cultural and e thical 
issues as it pertains to decision making in emergency care incl uding 
situations where patients do n ot have the capability or capacit y to 
give consent 
K KH Y Bedside clinic, SGT Application based 
questions/ Viva 
Voce 
 
GM 29.7 Identify, discuss and defend medico-legal, socio-cultur al and ethical 
issues as it pertains to research in study participants 
K KH Y SGT Application based 
questions/  Viva 
Voce 
 
GM 29.8 Demonstrate ability to work in a team of peers and supe riors S SH Y Bedside clinic, SGT – Role 
Play 
Skill assessment 
(Formative) 
 
GM 29.9 Demonstrate respect to patient privacy S SH Y Bedside c linic, SGT – Role play Skill assessment 
OSCE 
 
GM 29.10 Demonstrate ability to m aintain confidentiality in patient care S SH Y Bedside clinic, SGT – Role play Skill assessme nt 
OSCE 
 
GM 29.11 Demonstrate a commitment to continued learning S SH Y Bedside clinic, SGT 
Reflections writing 
Skill assessment 
(Formative)/ Viva voce 
 
GM 29.12 Demonstrate responsibilit y and work ethics while working in the health care 
team 
S SH Y Bedside clinic, DOAP, 
Role play 
Skill assessment 
Formative)/ Viva voce 
 
GM 29.13 Demonstrate ability to m aintain required documentation  in health care 
(including correct use of medical records) 
S SH Y SGT Skill assessment 
Formative) / Viva voce 
 
GM 29.14 Demonstrate personal gr ooming that is adequate and app ropriate for 
health care responsibilities 
S SH Y SGT 
Role play 
Skill assessment 
Formative)

86  
Number COMPETENCY 
The student should be able to 
Predominant 
Domain 
K/S/A/C 
Level 
K/KH/S 
H/P 
Core 
(Y/N) 
Suggested Teaching 
Learning method 
Suggested 
Assessment 
method 
Number 
required 
to certify 
P 
GM 29.15 Demonstrate adequate knowledge and use of information technology that 
permits appropriate patient care and continued learning 
S SH Y SGT Skill assessment 
Formative)/ Viva voce 
 
GM 29.16 Demonstrate awareness of limitations and seeks help an d consultations 
appropriately 
S SH Y Bedside clinic, DOAP 
Role play 
Skill assessment 
Formative/ Viva voce 
 
GM 29.17 Demonstrate ability to balance personal and professionalpriorities S SH N SGT 
Role plays 
Role modelling 
Skill assessment 
Formative / Viva voce 
 
GM 29.18 Demonstrate ability to manage time appropriately S SH Y SGT 
Role plays 
Skill assessment 
Formative / Viva voce 
 
GM 29.19 Demonstrate ability to form and function in appropriate profess ional 
networks 
S SH N SG T Skill assessment 
Formative/ Viva voce 
 
GM 29.20 Demonstrate ability to pursue and seek career advancementS  S H N S G T Skill assessment 
Formative / Viva voce 
 
GM 29.21 Demonstrate ability to f ollow risk management and medical error reduction 
practices where appropriate 
S SH N SGT 
Role play 
Skill assessment 
Formative / Viva voce 
 
GM 29.22 Demonstrate ability to w ork in a mentoring relationshi p with junior 
colleagues 
S SH N SGT Skill assessment 
Formative / Viva voce 
 
GM 29.23 Demonstrate commitment to learning and scholarship S SH N S GT Skill assessment 
Formative / Viva voce 
 
GM 29.24 Identify, discuss and defend med ico-legal, socio-cultural profe ssional and 
ethical issues in dealing with Impaired physicians 
K KH N SG T Application based 
questions/ Viva Voce 
 
GM 29.25 Demonstrate altruism S SH Y SGT 
Role play 
Role modelling 
Skill assessment, OSCE  
GM 29.26 Administer informed consent and appropriately address patient queries to a 
patient being enrolled in a research protocol in a simulated environment 
S SH Y Bedside clinic, DOAP 
Role play 
Skill assessment 
OSCE

87  
 
 
 
PEDIATRICS (CODE: PE)

88  
Number COMPETENCY 
Thestudentshouldbeableto 
Predominant 
Domain 
K/S/A/C 
Level 
K/KH/ SH/P
Core 
Y/N 
SuggestedTeaching Learning 
methods 
SuggestedAssessmen 
t methods 
Number 
required 
tocertify 
P 
PEDIATRICS(Topics:35, Competencies: 406) 
Topic 1: Normal Growth and Development Number of competencies: (03) Number of competencies that require certification: (NIL)   
PE1.1 Define the terminologies Growth and development and describe the 
factors affecting normal growth. 
K K H Y LGT,SGT Written/Vivavoce  
Number COMPETENCY 
The student should be able to 
Predominant 
Domain 
K/S/A/C 
Level 
K/KH/ SH/P
Core 
Y/N 
Suggested Teaching 
Learning methods 
Suggested  
Assessment methods 
Number 
required 
to 
certify P 
PE1.2 Describe the methods of assessment of growth including use of WHO 
and Indian national standards. Enumerate the parameters used for 
assessment of physical growth in infants, children and adolescents 
and Perform Anthropometric measurements, document in growth-
charts  and interpret. 
K K H Y LGT,SGT Written/Vivavoce  
PE1.3 Define development and Describe the normal developmental 
milestones with respect to motor, behaviour, social, adaptive and 
language. 
Discuss the factors affecting development and describe the assessment 
methods of development. 
K K H Y LGT,SGT Written/Vivavoce  
Topic2: Common problems related to Growth                Number of competencies:(03)                  Number of competencies that require certification: (NIL) 
PE2.1 Discusstheetio-pathogenesis, clinical features, assessment and 
management of a child who fails to thrive 
K K H Y LGT,SGT Written/Vivavoce  
PE2.2 Counselling the parent of a child with failure to thrive. A/C SH Y OSPE DocumentinLogbook

89  
PE2.3 Discuss the etio-pathogenesis, clinical features and managementof a 
child with short stature. Assessmentofachildwithshortstature. 
K K H Y LGT,SGT Written/Vivavoce  
Topic 3: Common problems related to Development-1            Number of competencies:(04)    Number of competencies that requir e certification:(NIL) 
(Developmental delay, Cerebral palsy) 
PE3.1 Define developmental delay. Describe the causes of developmental 
delay and disability including intellectual disability in children 
K K Y LGT,SGT Written/Vivavoce  
PE3.2 Explain the approach to a child with developmental delay S S H Y Bedside clinics, Skills lab Skill assessment  
PE3.3 Counsel a parent ofachild with developmental delay S+C SH Y DOAP DocumentinLogBoo 
k 
 
PE3.4 Visit a Child Developmental Unit and observe its functioning S KH Y LGT, SGT LogbookEntry  
Topic 4: Common problems related to Development-2 (Autism, ADHD)   Number of competencies: (02) Number of competencies that re quire certification: (NIL) 
PE4.1 Describe the etiology, clinical features, diagnosis and management of 
a child with Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD) 
K K N LGT,SGT Written  
Number COMPETENCY 
The student should be able to 
Predominant 
Domain 
K/S/A/C 
Level 
K/KH/ SH/P
Core 
Y/N 
SuggestedTeaching Learning 
methods 
SuggestedAssessmen 
t methods 
Number 
required 
tocertify 
P 
PE4.2 Describe the etiology, clinical features, diagnosis and management of 
a child with Autism 
K K N LGT,SGT Written  
Topic 5: Common problems related to behavior Number of competen cies: (04) Number of competencies that require certification: ( NIL) 
PE5.1 Describe the clinical features, diagnosis and management of 
Feeding problems 
K K N LGT,SGT Written  
PE5.2 Describe the clinical features, diagnosis and management of Breath 
Holding spells 
K K N LGT,SGT Written/Vivavoce  
PE5.3 Describe the clinical features, diagnosis and management of temper 
tantrums and Pica 
K K N LGT,SGT Written/Vivavoce  
PE5.4 Explain the etiology, clinical features and management of Enuresis K K N LGT,SGT Written/Vivavoce  
Topic 6: Adolescent Health & common problems related to Adolescent Health  Number of competencies: (12) Number of competencies  that require certification: (NIL) 
PE6.1 Define Adolescence and Describe the stages of adolescence K K Y LGT,SGT Written/Vivavoce

90  
PE6.2 Describe the physical, physiological and psychologicalchanges 
during adolescence (Puberty) 
K K H Y LGT,SGT Written/Vivavoce  
PE6.3 Describe the general health problems during adolescence K K H Y LGT,SGT Written/Vivavoce  
PE6.4 Describe adolescent sexuality and common problems related to it K K H N LGT,SGT Written/Vivavoce  
PE6.5 Describe the common Adolescent eating disorders (Anorexia 
Nervosa, Bulimia) 
K K H N LGT,SGT Written/Vivavoce  
PE6.6 Describe the commonmental health problems during adolescence K K H Y LGT,SGT Written/Vivavoce  
PE6.7 Respecting patient privacy and maintaining confidentiality while 
dealing with adolescence 
A SH Y Bedside clinics Document in log 
book 
 
PE6.8 Perform routine Adolescent Health check up including eliciting history, 
performing examination including SMR (Sex Maturity Rating),growth 
assessments(usingGrowthcharts)andsystemic exam 
including thyroid and Breast exam and the HEADSS screening 
S S H Y Bedside clinics Skillsstation  
Number COMPETENCY 
The student should be able to 
Predominant 
Domain 
K/S/A/C 
Level 
K/KH/ SH/P
Core 
Y/N 
Suggested Teaching 
Learning methods 
Suggested  
Assessment methods 
Number 
required 
tocertify 
P 
PE6.9 Explain the objectives and functions of AFHS (Adolescent Friendly 
Health Services) and the referral criteria 
K K N LGT,SGT Written/Viva voce  
PE6.10 Visit to the Adolescent Clinic S K H Y DOAP Document in Log 
Book 
 
PE6.11 Enumerate the importance of obesity and other NCD in adolescents K K Y LGT,SGT Written/Viva voce  
PE6.12 Enumerate the prevalence and importance of recognition of 
sexual abuse and drug abuse in adolescents and children 
K K N LGT,SGT Written/Viva voce  
Topic 7: To promote and support optimal Breast feeding for Infants Number of competencies: (08) Number of competencies that re quire certification: (01) 
PE7.1 Awareness on the cultural beliefs and practices of breastfeeding and 
explain physiology of lactation 
K K N LGT,SGT Viva  
PE7.2 Describe the composition and types of breast milk and discuss 
the differences between cow’s milk and Human milk 
K K H Y LGT,debate Written/Vivavoce  
PE7.3 Describe the advantages of breast milk K K H Y LGT,SGT Written/Vivavoce

91  
PE7.4 Observe the correct technique of breastfeeding and distinguish right 
from wrong techniques 
S P Y Bedside clinics, Skills lab Skill assessment 3 
PE7.5 Enumerate the baby friendly hospital initiatives K K H Y LGT,SGT Written/Vivavoce  
PE7.6 Describe the principles of IYCF (Infant and Young Child Feeding) K K H N SGT Viva voce  
PE7.7 Participate in World Breastfeeding Week (WBW) celebration at your 
institute 
K,S,C SH,P N Outreach activities   
PE7.8 Describe the structure and functioning of human milk bank and visit 
the nearest human bilk bank 
K,C KH N SGT Viva voce  
Topic 8: Complementary Feeding Number of competencies : (05) Nu mber of competencies that require certification: (NIL) 
PE8.1 Define the term Complementary Feeding K K Y LGT,SGT Written/Vivavoce  
PE8.2 Explain the principles, the initiation, attributes, frequency, techniques 
and hygiene related to Complementary Feeding. 
K K H Y LGT,SGT Written/Vivavoce  
Number COMPETENCY 
The student should be able to 
Predominant 
Domain 
K/S/A/C 
Level 
K/KH/ SH/P
Core 
Y/N 
Suggested Teaching 
Learning methods 
Suggested  
Assessment methods 
Number 
required 
tocertify 
P 
PE8.3 Enumeratethecommoncomplementaryfoods K K Y LGT,SGT Written/Vivavoce  
PE8.4 ElicithistoryontheComplementaryFeedinghabits S S H Y Bedside clinics,Skills lab Skill assessment  
PE8.5 Counselandeducatemothersonthebestpracticesin Complementary 
Feeding 
A/C SH Y DOAP DocumentinLogBook  
Topic 9: Normal nutrition, assessment and monitoring Number of competencies : (07) Number of competencies that require certifi cation: (NIL) 
PE9.1 Describe age-related nutritional needs of infants, children and 
adolescents including micronutrients and vitamins 
K K H Y LGT,SGT Written/Vivavoce  
PE9.2 Describe the tools and methods for assessment and classification of 
nutritional status of infants, children and adolescents 
K K H Y LGT,SGT Written/Vivavoce  
PE9.3 Explain the Calorific value of common Indian foods K K Y LGT,SGT Written/Vivavoce  
PE9.4 Elicit document and present an appropriate nutritional history and 
perform a dietary recall 
S S H Y Bedside clinic, Skills lab Skill assessment

92  
PE9.5 Calculate the age-related calorie requirement in Health and Disease, and 
identify gap 
S S H Y Bedside clinics,SGT Skill assessment  
PE9.6 Assess and classify the nutrition status of infants, children and 
adolescents and recognize deviations 
S S H Y Bedside clinic,SGT Skill assessment  
PE9.7 Plan an appropriate diet in health and isease S S H N Bedside clinic,SGT Documentinlogbook  
Topic 10: Provide nutritional support, assessment and monitoring  f o r  c o m m o n  n u t r i t i o n a l  p r o b l e m s    N u m b e r  o f  c o m p e t e n c i e s :  ( 0 6) Number of competencies that require certification: (NIL) 
PE10.1 Define and describe the etio-pathogenesis, classify includingWHO 
classification, clinical features, complication and management of 
Severe Acute Malnutrition (SAM) and Moderate Acute Malnutrition 
(MAM) 
K K H Y LGT,SGT Written/Vivavoce  
PE10.2 OutlinetheclinicalapproachtoachildwithSAMandMAM K K H Y LGT,SGT Written/Vivavoce  
PE10.3 Assessment of a patient with SAM and MAM, diagnosis, classification 
and planning management including hospital and community 
based intervention, rehabilitation and prevention 
S S H Y Bedside clinics, Skills lab Skillstation  
Number COMPETENCY 
The student should be able to 
Predominant 
Domain 
K/S/A/C 
Level 
K/KH/ SH/P
Core 
Y/N 
Suggested Teaching 
Learning methods 
Suggested 
Assessment methods 
Number 
required 
tocertify 
P 
PE10.4 Counsel parents of children with SAM and MAM S S H Y Bedside clinic, Skills Station Document in Logbook  
PE10.5 Enumerate the role of locally prepared therapeutic diets and ready to 
use therapeutic diets 
K K N LGT,SGT Written/Vivavoce  
PE10.6 Explain the Adolescent Nutrition and common nutritional problems K KH Y LGT, SGT Written/ Vivavoce  
Topic 11: Obesity in children Number of competencies: (04) Numb er of competencies that require certification: (01) 
PE11.1 Describe the etiology, clinical features and management of obesity in 
children 
K K H Y LGT,SGT Written/Vivavoce  
PE11.2 Describe the risk approach for obesity and discuss the prevention 
strategies 
K K H Y LGT,SGT Written/Vivavoce  
PE11.3 Assessment of a child with obesity with regard to eliciting history 
including physical activity, charting and dietary recall 
S S H Y Bedside clinics, 
Standardizedpatients 
Documentinlog book

93  
PE11.4 Examination including calculation of BMI, measurement of waist-hip 
ratio, identifying external markers like acanthosis, striae, 
pseudogynaecomastia etc 
S S H Y Bedside clinics, 
Standardizedpatients, 
Videos 
SkillsStation  
Topic 12: Micronutrients in Health and disease-1 (Vitamins ADEK, B Complex and C) Number of competencies: (08) Number of compe tencies that require certification: (NIL) 
PE12.1 Describe the RDA, dietary sources of Vitamin A, its metabolism. K K Y LGT,SGT Written/Vivavoce  
PE12.2 Describe the causes, clinical features, classification, diagnosis and 
management of Deficiency/excess of Vitamin A 
K K H Y LGT,SGT Written/Vivavoce  
PE12.3 Describe the causes, clinical features, diagnosis and management of 
Deficiency/excess of Vitamin D (Rickets and Hypervitaminosis D) 
K K H Y LGT,SGT Written/Vivavoce  
PE12.4 Describe the causes, clinical features, diagnosis and management of 
deficiencyof Vitamin E 
K K H N LGT,SGT Written/Vivavoce  
PE12.5 Describe the RDA, dietary sources of Vitamin K and their role in health 
and disease 
K K N LGT,SGT Written/Vivavoce  
Number COMPETENCY 
The student should be able to 
Predominant 
Domain 
K/S/A/C 
Level 
K/KH/ SH/P
Core 
Y/N 
Suggested Teaching 
Learning methods 
Suggested  
Assessment methods 
Number 
required 
tocertify 
P 
PE12.6 Describe the causes, clinical features, diagnosis, management and 
prevention of deficiency of Vitamin K 
K K H N LGT,SGT Written/Viva voce  
PE12.7 Describe the causes, clinical features, diagnosis and 
management of deficiency of B complex Vitamins 
K K H Y LGT,SGT Written/Viva voce  
PE12.8 Describe the RDA, dietary sources of Vitamin C and their role in Health 
and disease, clinical features of deficiency and management 
K K H N LGT,SGT Written/Viva voce  
Topic 13: Micronutrients in Health and disease -2: Iron, Iodine, Calcium, Magnesium Number of competencies: (04) Number of com petencies that require certification: (NIL) 
PE13.1 Describe the RDA, dietary sources of Iron and their role in health and 
disease, clinical features of iron deficiency, and management 
K K Y LGT,SGT Written/Viva voce  
PE13.2 Describe the National anaemia control program and its 
recommendations 
K K Y LGT,SGT Written/Viva voce

94  
PE13.3 Describe the RDA, dietary sources of Iodine and their role in 
Health and disease, deficiency, and Goiter control program 
K K Y LGT,SGT Written/Viva voce  
PE13.4 Describe the RDA, dietary sources of Calcium and 
Magnesium and their role in health and disease, clinical features and 
management of deficiency states. 
K K Y LGT,SGT Written/Viva voce  
Topic 14: Poisoning Number of competencies: (03) Number of comp etencies that require certification (NIL) 
PE14.1 Explain the risk factors, clinical features, diagnosis and management of 
Kerosene ingestion 
K K H N LGT,SGT Written/Viva voce  
PE14.2 Explain the risk factors, clinical features, diagnosis and management of 
Organophosphorus poisoning 
K K H N LGT,SGT Written/Viva voce  
PE14.3 Describe the risk factors, clinical features, diagnosis and management 
of paracetamol poisoning 
K K H N LGT,SGT Written/Vivavoce  
Topic 15: Fluid and electrolyte balance Number of competencies: (04) Number of competencies that require certification:(NIL) 
PE15.1 Describe the fluid and electrolyte requirement in health and disease K K H Y LGT,SGT Written/Viva voce  
Number COMPETENCY 
The student should be able to 
Predominant 
Domain 
K/S/A/C 
Level 
K/KH/ SH/P
Core 
Y/N 
Suggested Teaching 
Learning methods 
Suggested 
Assessment methods 
Number 
required 
tocertify 
P 
PE15.2 Interpret electrolyte report and describe the management of sodium and 
potassium imbalance 
S S H Y Bedside clinics,SGT Skill assessment  
PE15.3 Demonstrate the steps of inserting an IV cannula in a model S S H Y Skills Lab mannequin  
PE15.4 Demonstrate the steps of inserting an interosseous line in a mannequin S S H Y Skills Lab mannequin  
Topic 16: Integrated Management of Neonatal and Childhood Illnesses (IMNCI) Guideline Number of competencies:(06)              Number of competencies that require certification: (NIL) 
PE16.1 Explain the components of Integrated Management of Neonatal and 
Childhood Illnesses (IMNCI)guidelines and method of Risk stratification 
K K H Y LGT,SGT Written/Vivavoce  
PE16.2 Assess children<2months using IMNCI Guidelines S S H Y DOAP Document in log Book  
PE16.3 Assess children 2 months to 5 years using IMNCI guidelines and Stratify 
Risk 
S S H Y DOAP Document in log Book

95  
PE16.4 Identify children with undernutrition as per IMNCI criteria and plan 
referral 
S S H Y DOAP Document in log book  
PE16.5 Identify and stratify risk in a sick neonate using IMNCI guidelines S SH Y DOAP Document in Log 
Book 
 
PE16.6 Apply the IMNCI guidelines in risk stratification of children w ith 
diarrheal dehydration and refer  
S SH Y Bedside clinics, Skillslab Document in Log 
book 
 
Topic 17: The National Health programs, NHM Number of competenc ies:(01) Number of competencies that require certification: (NI L) 
PE17.1 Describe the vision and outline the goals, strategies and plan of action 
of NHM and other important national programs pertaining to 
maternal and child health including RCH, RMNCH A+, RBSK, RKSK, JSSK 
mission 
Indradhanush and ICDS 
K K H Y LGT,SGT Written/Viva voce  
Topic 18: National Programs, RCH - Universal Immunizations program Number of competencies: (14)                             Nu mber of competencies that require certification: (01) 
PE18.1 Explain the components of the Universal Immunization Program and the 
National Immunization Program 
K K H Y LGT,SGT Written/Vivavoce  
PE18.2 Explain the epidemiology of Vaccine preventable diseases K K H Y LGT,SGT Written/Vivavoce  
Number COMPETENCY 
The student should be able to 
Predominant 
Domain 
K/S/A/C 
Level 
K/KH/ SH/P
Core 
Y/N 
Suggested Teaching 
Learning methods 
Suggested 
Assessment methods 
Number 
required 
tocertify 
P 
PE18.3 Describe Vaccine with regards to classification of vaccines, strain used, 
dose, route, schedule, risks, benefits and side effects, indications and 
Contraindications 
K K H Y LGT,SGT Written/Viva voce  
PE18.4 Define cold-chain and discuss the methods of safe storage and handling 
of vaccines 
K K H Y LGT,SGT Written/Viva voce  
PE18.5 Describe immunization in special situations – HIV positive children, 
immunodeficiency, pre-term, organ transplants, those who received 
blood and blood products, splenectomised children, adolescents, 
travelers 
K K H Y LGT,SGT Written/Viva voce  
PE18.6 Assess patient for fitness for immunization and prescribe an age- 
appropriate immunization schedule 
S P Y Out Patient clinics Skills lab Skill assessment 5

96  
PE18.7 Educate and counsel apparent for immunization A/C SH Y DOAP Document in Log 
Book 
 
PE18.8 Describe the components of safe vaccine practice – Patient 
education/ counselling; adverse events following immunization, safe 
injection practices, documentation and Medico-legal implications 
K K H Y LGT,SGT Written/Vivavoce  
PE18.9 Observe the handling and storing of vaccines S S H Y DOAP Written/Vivavoce  
PE18.10 Document Immunization in an immunization record S S H Y Out Patient clinics, Skills lab Skill assessment  
PE18.11 Observe the administration of UIP vaccines S S H Y DOAP Document in Log 
Book 
 
PE18.12 Demonstrate the correct administration of different vaccines 
ina mannequin 
S S H Y DOAP Document in Log 
Book 
 
PE18.13 Explain the term implied consent in Immunization services K K Y SGT Written/Viva voce  
PE18.14 Enumerate available newer vaccines and their indications including 
pentavalent pneumococcal, rotavirus, JE, Hepatitis A, Influenza, COVID,
typhoid, IPV & HPV 
K K N LGT, SGT Written/Viva voce  
Topic 19: Care of the Normal New born, and High risk New born N umber of competencies: (17) Number of competencies that require  certification: (NIL) 
Number COMPETENCY 
The student should be able to 
Predominant 
Domain 
K/S/A/C 
Level 
K/KH/ SH/P
Core 
Y/N 
Suggested Teaching 
Learning methods 
Suggested 
Assessment methods 
Number 
required 
tocertify 
P 
PE19.1 Define the common neonatal nomenclatures including the classification 
new born and describe the characteristics of a Normal Term Neonate 
and High-Risk Neonates, Explain the care of a normal neonate 
K K H Y LGT,SGT Written/Viva voce  
PE19.2 Perform Neonatal resuscitation on a manikin S S H Y DOAP Log book entry of 
Performance 
 
PE19.3 Assessment of a normal neonate. Explain the follow up care for 
neonates including Breast Feeding, Temperature maintenance, 
immunization, importance of growth monitoring and red flags 
S S H Y Bedside clinics, Skills lab Skill assessment  
PE19.4 Describe the etiology, clinical features and management of Birth 
asphyxia 
K K H Y LGT,SGT Written/Viva voce

97  
PE19.5 Describe the etiology, clinical features and management of 
Respiratory distress in New-born including meconium 
aspiration and transient tachypnoea of newborn 
K K H Y LGT,SGT Written/Viva voce  
PE19.6 Explain the etiology, clinical features and management of Birth injuries K K H Y LGT,SGT Written/Viva voce  
PE19.7 Explain the etiology, clinical features and management of 
Hemorrhagic disease of Newborn 
K K H Y LGT,SGT Written/Viva voce  
PE19.8 Describe the clinical characteristics, complications and management of 
Low birth weight (preterm and Small for gestation) 
K K H Y LGT,SGT Written/Vivavoce  
PE19.9 Describe the temperature regulation in neonates, clinical  
features and management ofNeonatal Hypothermia 
K K H Y LGT,SGT Written/Viva voce  
PE19.10 Describe the temperature regulation in neonates, clinical features 
and management of Neonatal Hypoglycemia 
K K H Y LGT,SGT Written/Viva voce  
PE19.11 Explain the etiology, clinical features and management of Neonatal 
hypocalcemia 
K K H Y LGT,SGT Written/Viva voce  
PE19.12 Describe the etiology, clinical features and management of 
Neonatal seizures 
K K H Y LGT,SGT Written/Viva voce  
Number COMPETENCY 
The student should be able to 
Predominant 
Domain 
K/S/A/C 
Level 
K/KH/ SH/P
Core 
Y/N 
Suggested Teaching 
Learning methods 
Suggested  
Assessment methods 
Number 
required 
tocertify 
P 
PE19.13 Explain the etiology, clinical features and management of Neonatal 
Sepsis 
K K H Y LGT,SGT Written/Viva voce  
PE19.14 Describe the etiology, clinical features and management of Perinatal 
infections 
K K H Y LGT,SGT Written/Viva voce  
PE19.15 Describe the etiology, clinical features and management of Neonatal 
hyperbilirubinemia 
K K H Y LGT,SGT Written/Viva voce  
PE19.16 Identify clinical presentations of common surgical conditions in the 
newborn including TEF, esophageal atresia, anal atresia, cleft lip and 
palate, congenital diaphragmatic hernia and causes of acute abdomen 
K K H Y LGT,SGT Written/Viva voce

98  
PE19.17 Describe the riskfactors, clinical features, diagnosis and management of 
Oxygen toxicity 
K KH N LGT, SGT Written/ Viva voce  
Topic 20: Genito-Urinary system Number of competencies (09) Num ber of competencies that require certification: (NIL) 
PE20.1 Enumerate the etio-pathogenesis, clinical features, complications 
and management of Urinary Tract infection in children 
K K H Y LGT,SGT Written/Viva voce  
PE20.2 Enumerate the etio-pathogenesis, clinical features, complications 
and management of Acute Post-Streptococcal Glomerulonephritis 
in Children 
K K H Y LGT,SGT Written/Viva voce  
PE20.3 Describe the approach and referral criteria to a child with Proteinuria K K H Y LGT,SGT Written/Viva voce  
PE20.4 Describe the approach and referral criteria to a child with Hematuria K K H Y LGT,SGT Written/Viva voce  
PE20.5 Enumerate the etio-pathogenesis, clinical features, complications 
and management of Acute Renal Failure in children 
K K H Y LGT,SGT Written/Viva voce  
PE20.6 Enumerate the etio-pathogenesis, clinical features, complications 
and management of Chronic Renal Failure in Children 
K K H Y LGT,SGT Written/Viva voce  
PE20.7 Enumerate the etio-pathogenesis, clinical features, complications 
and management of Wilms Tumor 
K K H Y LGT,SGT Written/Viva voce  
PE20.8 Perform and interpret the common analytes in a Urine examination S S H Y Bedside clinics, Skills lab Skill assessment  
Number COMPETENCY 
The student should be able to 
Predominant 
Domain 
K/S/A/C 
Level 
K/KH/ SH/P
Core 
Y/N 
Suggested 
Teaching Learning methods 
Suggested 
Assessment methods 
Number 
required 
tocertify 
P 
PE20.9 InterpretreportofPlainXRayofKUB S S H Y Bedside clinics, Skills lab Log book  
Topic 21: Approach to and recognition of a child with possible Rheumatologic problem Number of competencies: (050                                Number of competencies that require certification:(NIL) 
PE21.1 Enumerate the common Rheumatological problems in children. 
Discuss the clinical approach to recognition and referral of a child with 
Rheumatological problem 
K K H Y LGT,SGT Written/Viva voce  
PE21.2 Describe the etiopathogenesis, diagnosis and management of Henoch 
Schoenlein Purpura. 
K K N LGT,SGT Written/Viva voce

99  
PE21.3 Describe the etiopathogenesis, diagnosis and management of Kawasaki 
Disease 
K K N LGT,SGT Written/Viva voce  
PE21.4 Describe the etiopathogenesis, diagnosis and management of SLE K K N LGT,SGT Written/Viva voce  
PE21.5 Describe the etiopathogenesis, diagnosis and management of JIA K K N LGT,SGT Written/Viva voce  
Topic 22: Cardiovascular system- Heart Diseases Number of compe tencies: (11) Number of competencies that require certification :(NIL) 
PE22.1 Describe the Hemodynamic changes, clinical presentation, complications
and management of Acyanotic Heart Diseases 
K K H Y LGT,SGT Written/Viva voce  
PE22.2 Describe the Hemodynamic changes, clinical presentation, complications
and management of Cyanotic Heart Diseases 
K K H Y LGT,SGT Written/Viva voce  
PE22.3 Explain the etio-pathogenesis, clinical presentation and management of 
cardiac failure in infant and children 
K K H Y LGT,SGT Written/Viva voce  
PE22.4 Explain the etio-pathogenesis, clinical presentation and management of 
Acute Rheumatic Fever in children 
K K H Y LGT,SGT Written/Viva voce  
PE22.5 Describe the etio-pathogenesis, clinical features and management of 
Infective endocarditis in children 
K K H Y LGT,SGT Written/Viva voce  
PE22.6 Describe the etiopathogenesis, grading, clinical features and 
management of hypertension in children 
K K H Y LGT,SGT Short notes  
PE22.7 Record pulse, blood pressure, temperature and respiratory rate 
and interpret as per the age 
S S H Y Bedside clinics, Skills lab Skill assessment  
Number COMPETENCY 
The student should be able to 
Predominant 
Domain 
K/S/A/C 
Level 
K/KH/ SH/P
Core 
Y/N 
Suggested Teaching 
Learning methods 
Suggested 
Assessment methods 
Number 
required 
tocertify 
P 
PE22.8 Perform independently examination of the cardiovascular system– look 
for precordial bulge, pulsations in the precordium, JVP and its 
significance in children and infants, relevance of percussion in Pediatric 
examination, Auscultation and other system examination and document
S S H Y Bedside clinics, Skills lab Skill station  
PE22.9 Interpret a chest X-ray and recognize cardiomegaly S S H Y Bedside clinics, Skills lab Log book entry  
PE22.10 Interpret Pediatric ECG S S H Y Bedside clinics, Skills lab Log book entry

100  
PE22.11 Demonstrate empathy while dealing with children with cardiac 
diseases in every patient encounter  
A SH Y SGT Document in Log 
Book 
 
Topic 23:  GIT and Hepatobiliary system Number of competencies:  (21) Number of competencies that require certification:(02) 
PE 23.1 Define vomiting, discuss causes, evaluation & management of vomiting 
in children 
K K H y LGT, SGT Written/ Viva voce  
PE23.2 Define constipation discuss causes, evaluation & management of 
constipation in children 
K K H Y LGT, SGT Written/ Viva voce  
PE23.3 Discuss the causes, evaluation and management of abdominal pain in 
children 
K K H Y LGT, SGT Written/ Viva voce  
PE23.4 Define diarrhea (acute diarrhea, chronic diarrhea, persistent diarrhea). 
Discuss etiology, risk factors, clinical features, complications, 
investigations and treatment (according to WHO guidelines) of acute 
gastroenteritis. 
K K H Y LGT, SGT Written/ Viva voce  
PE23.5 Discuss the causes, clinical presentation and management of dysentery 
in children 
K K H Y LGT, SGT Written/ Viva voce  
PE23.6 Discuss the physiological basis of ORT, types of ORS and the 
composition of various types of ORS. Discuss composition of fluids used 
in management of diarrhea. Discuss the role of antibiotics, 
antispasmodics, anti-secretory drugs, probiotics, anti-emetics in acute 
diarrheal diseases 
K K H Y LGT, SGT Written/ Viva voce  
Number COMPETENCY 
The student should be able to 
Predominant 
Domain 
K/S/A/C 
Level 
K/KH/ SH/P
Core 
Y/N 
Suggested 
Teaching Learning methods 
Suggested 
Assessment methods 
Number 
required 
tocertify 
P 
PE23.7 Elicit history pertaining to diarrheal diseases. Assess for sig ns & 
symptoms of dehydration, shock, prerenal AKI, electrolyte disturbances,
document and present. 
S S H Y Bedside clinics, Skills lab Skill assessment  
PE23.8 Perform and interpret stool examination including Hanging Drop, 
Interpret RFT and electrolyte report In the context of diarrhea 
S S H N Bedside clinics, Skills lab Log book  
PE23.9 Perform NG tube insertion in a manikin S P Y DOAP Document in Log 
book

101  
PE23.10 Perform IV cannulation in a model S P Y DOAP Document in Log 
book 
 
PE23.11 Perform Interosseous insertion model S P Y DOAP Document in Log 
book 
2 
PE23.12 Discuss the etio-pathogenesis, clinical presentation and management of 
Malabsorption in Children and its causes including celiac disease 
K K H N LGT, SGT Written/ Viva voce 2 
PE23.13 Discuss the etio-pathogenesis, clinical features and management of 
acute hepatitis in children 
K K H Y LGT,SGT activity Written/Viva voce  
PE23.14 Discuss the etio-pathogenesis, clinical features and management of 
Fulminant Hepatic Failure in children 
K K H Y LGT,SGT activity Written/Viva voce  
PE23.15 Discuss the etio-pathogenesis, clinical features and management of 
chronic liver diseases in children 
K K H Y LGT,SGT activity Written/Viva voce  
PE23.16 Discuss the etio-pathogenesis, clinical features and management of 
Portal Hypertension in children 
K K H Y LGT,SGT activity Written/Viva voce  
PE23.17 Elicit, document and present the history related to diseases of 
Gastrointestinal system 
S S H Y Bedside clinics,Skills lab Skills Station  
PE23.18 Identify external markers for GI and Liver disorders e.g. Jaundice, Pallor, 
Gynecomastia, Spider angioma, Palmar erythema, Ichthyosis, Caput 
medusa, Clubbing, failing to thrive, Vitamin A and D deficiency 
S S H Y Bedside clinics,Skills lab Skill assessment  
Number COMPETENCY 
The student should be able to 
Predominant 
Domain 
K/S/A/C 
Level 
K/KH/ SH/P
Core 
Y/N 
Suggested Teaching 
Learning methods 
Suggested 
Assessment methods 
Number 
required 
to 
certify P 
PE23.19 Perform examination of the abdomen, demonstrate organomegaly, 
ascites etc. 
S S H Y Bedside clinics,Skills lab Skill assessment  
PE23.20 Interpret Liver Function Tests, viral markers, ultra-sonogram report S S H Y Bedside clinics,Skills lab Skill assessment  
PE23.21 Enumerate the indications for Upper GI endoscopy K K N SGT Viva  voce  
Topic: 24 Pediatric Emergencies – Common Pediatric Emergencies Number of competencies: (23) Num ber of competencies that require certification:(10) 
PE24.1 Describe the etio-pathogenesis, clinical approach and management 
of cardio-respiratory arrest in children 
K KH Y LGT, SGT Written/ Viva voce

102  
PE24.2 Describe the etio-pathogenesis and management of 
respiratorydistressin children  
K KH Y LGT, SGT Written/ Viva voce  
PE24.3 Describe the etio-pathogenesis, clinical approach and management 
of Shock in children 
K KH Y LGT, SGT Written/ Viva voce  
PE24.4 Describe the etio-pathogenesis, clinical approach and management 
of  Status epilepticus 
K KH Y LGT, SGT Written/ Viva voce  
PE24.5 Describe theetio-pathogenesis, clinical approach and management 
of an unconscious child  
K KH Y LGT, SGT Written/ Viva voce  
PE24.6 Explain oxygen therapy, in Pediatric emergencies and modes of 
administration 
K KH Y LGT, SGT Written/ Viva voce  
PE24.7 Observe the various methods  of administering Oxygen S KH Y Demonstration Document in log 
book 
 
PE24.8 Assess airwayand breathing:  recognise signs ofsevere respiratory 
distress. Check for cyanosis, severe chest in drawing, Grunting 
S P Y DOAP, Skills lab Skills Assessment 3 
PE24.9 Assess airway and breathing. Demonstrate the method of positioning
of an infant & child to open airway in a Simulated environment  
S P Y DOAP, Skills Lab Skills Assessment 3 
PE24.10 Assess airway and breathing: administer oxygen using correct 
techniqueand appropriateflow rate  
S P Y DOAP, Skills Lab Skills Assessment 3 
Number COMPETENCY 
Thestudentshouldbeableto 
Predominant 
Domain 
K/S/A/C 
Level 
K/KH/ SH/P
Core 
Y/N 
Suggested 
Teaching Learning methods 
Suggested 
Assessment methods 
Number 
required 
tocertify 
P 
PE24.11 Assess airway and  breathing  perform assisted ventilation by Bag 
and mask in a simulated environment  
S P Y DOAP, Skills lab Skills Assessment 3 
PE24.12 Check for signs of shock i.e. pulse, Blood pressure, CRT S P Y DOAP, Skills Lab Skills Assessment 3 
PE24.13 Secure an IV access in a simulated environment S P Y DOAP, Skills Lab Skills Assessment 3

103  
PE24.14 Choose the type offluidand calculate the fluid requirement in s hock S P Y DOAP, SGTactivity Skills Assessment 3 
PE24.15 Assess level of consciousness & provide emergency treatment to 
achildwith convulsions/coma p osition an unconscious child. 
Position a child with suspected trauma. Administer IV/per rectal 
Diazepam for a convulsing child in a simulated environment. 
S P Y DOAP, Skills Lab Skills Assessment 3 
PE24.16 Assess for signs of severe dehydration S P Y Bedside clinics, Skills lab Skill station 3 
PE24.17 Monitoring and maintaining temperature: define hypothermia. 
Describe the clinical features, complications and management of  
Hypothermia 
K KH Y LGT, SGT Written/ Viva voce  
PE24.18 Describe the advantages and correct method of keeping an infant  
warm by skin- to- skin contact  
K KH Y LGT, SGT Written/ Viva voce  
PE24.19 Describe the environmental measures to maintain temperature K KH Y LGT, SGT Written/ Viva voce  
PE24.20 Assess for hypothermia and maintain temperature S SH Y Skillslab Skills Assessment  
PE24.21 Provide BLS for children in manikin S P Y SkillsLab Skills Assessment 3 
PE24.22 Counsel parents of dangerously ill/ terminally ill child to bre ak a bad 
news 
S SH Y DOAP Document in Log 
book 
 
PE24.23 Obtain Informed Consent S SH Y DOAP Document in Log 
book 
 
Number COMPETENCY 
The student should be able to 
Predominant 
Domain 
K/S/A/C 
Level 
K/KH/ SH/P
Core 
Y/N 
Suggested 
Teaching Learning methods 
Suggested 
Assessment methods 
Number 
required 
tocertify 
P 
Topic 25: Respiratory system Number of competencies: (06) Numbe r of competencies that require certification: (NIL) 
PE25.1 Describe the etio-pathogenesis, clinical features and management 
ofAcute Otitis Media (AOM) 
K KH Y LGT, SGT Written/ Viva voce  
PE25.2 Describe the etio-pathogenesis, clinical features and management o f  
Epiglottitis 
K KH Y LGT, SGT Written/ Viva voce

104  
PE25.3 Explain the etio-pathogenesis, clinical features and management 
ofAcute laryngo- tracheo-bronchitis  
K KH Y LGT, SGT Written/ Viva voce  
PE25.4 Describe the etiology, clinical features and management of Stridor in 
children 
K KH Y LGT, SGT Written/ Viva voce  
PE25.5 Describe the types, clinical presentation, and management of foreign
body aspiration in infants and children  
K KH Y LGT, SGT Written/ Viva voce  
PE25.6 Describe the etio-pathogenesis, diagnosis, clinical features, 
management and prevention of lower respiratory infections 
including bronchiolitis, wheeze associated LRTI Pneumonia and   
empyema 
S SH Y Bedside clinics, SGT,LGT Skill assessment 
/Written 
/Viva voce 
 
Topic 26: Anemia and other Hemato-oncologic disorders in childr en                Number of competencies: (17). Number of compe tencies that require certification: (NIL) 
PE26.1 Explain the etio-pathogenesis, clinical features, classification and 
approach to a child with anaemia 
K KH Y LGT, SGT Written/ Viva voce  
PE26.2 Describe the etio-pathogenesis, clinical features and management o f  
Iron Deficiency anaemia 
K KH Y LGT, SGT Written/ Viva voce  
PE26.3 Describe the etiopathogenesis, clinical features and management o f  
VITB12, Folate deficiency anaemia  
K KH Y LGT, SGT Written/ Viva voce  
PE26.4 Explain the etio-pathogenesis, clinical features and management of 
Hemolytic anemia, Thalassemia Major, Sickle cell anaemia, 
Hereditary spherocytosi s, Auto-immune hemolytic  
K KH Y LGT, SGT Written/ Viva voce  
Number COMPETENCY 
The student should be able to 
Predominant 
Domain 
K/S/A/C 
Level 
K/KH/ SH/P
Core 
Y/N 
Suggested 
Teaching Learning methods 
Suggested 
Assessment methods 
Number 
required 
tocertify 
P 
 anaemia and hemolytic uremic syndrome       
PE26.5 Describe the National Anaemia Control Program K KH Y LGT, SGT Written/ Viva voce

105  
PE26.6 Describe the cause of thromboc ytopenia in children: de sc ribe 
theclinical features and management of Idiopathic 
Thrombocytopenic Purpura(ITP) 
K KH N LGT, SGT Written/ Viva voce  
PE26.7 Explain the etiology, classification, pathogenesis and clinical  features
of Hemophilia in children  
K KH N LGT, SGT Written/ Viva voce  
PE26.8 Explain the etiology, clinical presentation and management of 
AcuteLymphoblastic Leukemia inchildren  
K KH N LGT, SGT Written/ Viva voce  
PE26.9 Explain the etiology, clinical presentation and management of 
lymphomain children 
K KH N LGT, SGT Written/ Vivavoce  
PE26.10 Perform examination of the abdomen, demonstrate organomegaly S SH Y Bedside clinics, Skills lab Skill assessment  
PE26.11 Interpret CBC, LFT S SH Y Bedside clinics, Skills lab Skill assessment  
PE26.12 Perform and interpret peripheral smear S SH Y DOAP Document in log 
book 
 
PE26.13 Explain the indications for Hemoglobin electrophoresis and interpret 
report 
K K N SGT Viva voce  
PE26.14 Demonstrate, performance of bone marrow aspiration in manikin S SH Y Skillslab Document in log 
Book 
 
PE26.15 Enumerate the referral criteria for Hematological conditions S SH Y Bedside clinics, SGT Viva voce  
PE26.16 Counsel and educate patients about prevention and treatment 
ofanemia 
A/C SH Y Bedside clinics, Skills lab Document in log 
book 
 
PE26.17 Enumerate the indications for splenectomy and precautions K K N SGT Activity Viva voce  
Topic 27: Systemic Pediatrics-Central Nervous system Number of competencies: (14) Number of competencies that require certific ation:(NIL) 
Number COMPETENCY 
The student should be able to 
Predominant 
Domain 
K/S/A/C 
Level 
K/KH/ SH/P
Core 
Y/N 
SuggestedTeaching Learning 
methods 
SuggestedAssessmen 
t methods 
Number 
required 
tocertify 
P 
PE27.1 Explain the etio-pathogene sis, clinical features, complications, 
management, and prevention of acute bacterial 
Meningitis in children 
K KH Y LGT, SGT Written/ Viva voce

106  
PE27.2 Describe the etio-pathogen esis, clinical features, complications, 
management and preventionof tuberculous m e n i n g i t i s 
K KH Y LGT, SGT Written/ Viva voce  
PE27.3 Distinguish bacterial, viral and tuberculous meningitis K KH Y LGT, SGT Written/ Viva voce  
PE27.4 Explain the etio-pathogenesis, classification, clinical 
features, complication and management of Hydrocephalus in 
children 
K KH Y LGT, SGT Written/ Viva voce  
PE27.5 Explain the etio-pathogenesis, clinical features, and management of 
Infantile hemiplegia 
K KH Y LGT, SGT Written/ Viva voce  
PE27.6 Explain the etio-pathogenesis, clinical features, complications and 
management of Febrile seizures in children 
K KH Y LGT, SGT Written/ Viva voce  
PE27.7 Define epilepsy. Discuss the pathogenesis, clinical types, presentation
and management of Epilepsy in children 
K KH Y LGT, SGT Written/ Viva voce  
PE27.8 Define status Epilepticus. Discuss the clinical presentation an d 
management 
K KH Y LGT, SGT Written/ Viva voce  
PE27.9 Describe the etio-pathogenesis, clinical features and management o f  
Mental retardation in children 
K KH Y LGT, SGT Written/ Viva voce  
PE27.10 Describe the etio-pathogenesis, clinical features and management o f  
children with cerebral palsy  
K KH Y LGT, SGT Written/ Viva voce  
PE27.11 Enumerate the causes of floppiness in an infant and discuss the 
clinical features, differential diagnosis and management 
K KH Y LGT, SGT Written/ Viva voce  
PE27.12 Explain the etio-pathogenesis, clinical features and management of 
Duchene muscular dystrophy  
K KH Y LGT, SGT Written/ Viva voce  
Number COMPETENCY 
The student should be able to 
Predominant 
Domain 
K/S/A/C 
Level 
K/KH/ SH/P
Core 
Y/N 
Suggested 
Teaching Learning methods 
Suggested 
Assessment methods 
Number 
required 
tocertify 
P 
PE27.13 Interpret and explain the findings in a CSF analysis S SH Y SGT Logbook

107  
PE27.14 Perform in a mannequin lumbar puncture. Discuss the indications, 
contraindication of the procedure 
S SH Y Bedside clinics, Skills lab Skill assessment  
Topic 28: Allergic Rhinitis, Atopic Dermatitis, Bronchial Asthm a Number of competencies: (05) Number of competencies that requ ire certification: (NIL) 
PE28.1 Describe the etio-pathogenesis, clinical signs, management and 
prevention of AllergicRhinitis in Children  
K KH Y LGT, SGT Written/ Viva voce  
PE28.2 Explainthe etio-pathogen esis, clinical types, presentations, 
management and prevention of childhood Asthma 
K KH Y  Written/ Viva voce  
PE28.3 Develop a treatment plan for Asthma appropriate to clinical 
presentation & severity  
S SH Y  Skill assessment  
PE28.4 Enumerate the indications for PFT K K N  Viva voce  
PE28.5 Observe administration of Nebulization S SH Y  Document in log 
book 
 
Topic 29: Chromosomal Abnormalitie s Number of competencies: (05 ) Number of competencies that require certification: (NIL) 
PE29.1 Describe the genetic basis, risk factors, clinical features, 
complications, prenatal diagnosis, management and genetic 
counselling in Down Syndrome.  
K KH Y  Written/ Viva voce  
PE29.2 Interpret normal Karyotype and recognize Trisomy 21 S SH Y Bedside clinics, Skills lab Log book  
PE29.3 Counsel parents regarding -1.Present child, 2.Risk in the next
pregnancy 
A/C SH N Bedside clinics, Skills lab Log book  
PE29.4 Describe the geneticbasis, risk factors, clinical features, complications, 
prenatal diagnosis, manageme nt and genetic counselling in  
Turner’s Syndrome 
K KH N LGT, SGT Written/ Viva voce  
PE29.5 Describe the genetic basis, risk factors, clinical features, 
complications, prenatal diagnosis, management and genetic 
counselling in Klinefelter Syndrome 
K KH Y LGT, SGT Written/ Viva voce  
Number COMPETENCY 
The student should be able to 
Predominant 
Domain 
K/S/A/C 
Level 
K/KH/ SH/P
Core 
Y/N 
Suggested 
Teaching Learning methods 
Suggested 
Assessment methods 
Number 
required 
tocertify 
P

108  
Topic 30: Endocrinology Number of competencies: (07) Number of competencies that require  certification: (01) 
PE30.1 Describe the etiology (congenital & acquired), clinical features, 
management of Hypothyroidism in children 
K KH Y LGT, SGT Written/ Viva voce  
PE30.2 Interpret and explain neonatal thyroid screening report S SH Y Bedside clinics, SGT Skill assessment  
PE30.3 Describe the etiology, clinical types, clinical features, diagnostic criteria, 
complications and management of Diabetes mellitus in children 
K KH Y LGT, SGTs Written/ Viva voce  
PE30.4 Recognize clinical features DKA, Perform and interpret Urine Dip Stick 
for Sugar & Ketone bodies & refer 
S P Y DOAP Skill assessment 3 
PE30.5 Perform genital examination and recognize Ambiguous Genitalia, 
counsel and refer 
S SH Y Bedside clinicSkills lab Skill assessment  
PE30.6 Define precocious and delayed Puberty, Perform Sexual Maturity Rating 
(SMR), Recognize precocious and delayed Puberty and refer 
K, S KH Y LGT, SGT Written/ Viva voce  
PE30.7 Identify deviations in growth and plan appropriate referral S P Y Bedside clinics,Skills Lab Skill assessment  
Topic 31:Vaccine preventable Diseases – Tuberculosis Number of competencies: (14) Number of competencies that require certific ation: (NIL) 
PE31.1 Describe the epidemiology, c linical features, clinical types, 
complications of Tuberculosis in Children and Adolescents 
K KH Y LGT, SGT Written/ Viva voce  
PE31.2 Describe the various diagnostic tools for childhood tuberculosi s K KH Y LGT, SGT Written/ Viva voce  
PE31.3 Describe the various regimens for management of Tuberculosis as 
per National Guidelines  
K KH Y LGT, SGT Written/ Viva voce  
PE31.4 Describe the preventive strategies adopted and the objectives and 
outcome of the National Tuberculosis Control Program  
K KH Y LGT, SGT Written/ Viva voce  
PE31.5 Elicit, document and present hist ory of contact with tuberculos is in 
every patient encounter, Identify BCG scar and interpret a Mant oux 
test. 
S SH Y Bedside clinics, Skilllab Skill assessment  
PE31.6 Interpret blood tests in the context of laboratory evidence for 
tuberculosis 
S SH N Bedside clinics, SGT Log book

109  
Number COMPETENCY 
The student should be able to 
Predominant 
Domain 
K/S/A/C 
Level 
K/KH/ SH/P
Core 
Y/N 
Suggested 
Teaching Learning methods 
Suggested 
Assessment methods 
Number 
required 
tocertify 
P 
PE31.7 Describe the various samples for demonstrating the organism e.g. 
Gastric Aspirate, Sputum, CSF, FNAC  
K KH Y Bedside clinics, SGT Written/ Viva voce  
PE31.8 Enumeratethe indications, discuss the limitations of methods of 
culturing M. Tuberculosis and the newer diagnostic tools for 
Tuberculosis including BACTEC CBNAAT an-d their indications 
K KH Y SGT Written/ Viva voce  
PE31.9 Enumerate the common causes of fever and describe the 
etiopathogenesis, clinical features, complications and 
managementof fever inchildren 
K KH Y LGT, SGT Written/ Viva voce  
PE31.10 Enumerate the common causes of fever and describe the 
etiopathogenesis, clinical features, complications and 
managementof child with exanthematous illnesses like Measles, 
Mumps, Rubella  &Chicken pox 
K KH Y LGT, SGT Written/ Viva voce  
PE31.11 Enumerate the common causes of fever and discuss the 
etiopathogenesis, clinical features, complications and 
managementof child with Diphtheria, Pertussis, Tetanus. 
K KH Y LGT, SGT Written/ Vivavoce  
PE31.12 Enumerate the common causes of fever and discuss the 
etiopathogenesis, clinical features, complications and 
managementof child withTyphoid 
K KH Y LGT, SGT Written/ Vivavoce  
PE31.13 Enumerate the common cause s of fever and discuss 
theetiopathogenesis, clinical features, complications and 
management of child withDengue, Chikungunyaand other 
vectorborne diseases 
K KH Y LGT, SGT Written/ Vivavoce  
PE31.14 Enumerate the common cause s of fever and discuss 
theetiopathogenesis, clinical features, complications and 
managementof children with Common Parasitic infections, malaria, 
leishmaniasis, filariasis, helminthic infestations,  
amebiasis, giardiasis 
K KH Y LGT, SGT Written/ Vivavoce  
Topic 32: The role of the physician in the community Number of competencies: (01) Number of competencies that require certific ation : (NIL) 
PE32.1 Identify, Describe and Defend medicolegal, socio-cultural and 
ethicalissuesas they pertain to health care in children (including 
Parental rights and  right to refuse treatment) 
K KH Y SGT Written/ Viva voce

110  
 
 
 
 
 
 
PSYCHIATRY (CODE: PS)

111  
 
Number COMPETENCY 
The student should be able to 
Predominant 
Domain 
K/S/A/C 
Level 
K/KH/S 
H/P 
Core 
(Y/N) 
Suggested Teaching 
Learning method 
Suggested 
Assessment 
method 
 Number 
required 
to certify 
P 
PSYCHIATRY (Topics=13, Competencies=17) 
Topic 1: Introduction to Psychiatry Number of competencies:03 Nu mber of competencies that require certification : (NIL) 
PS 1.1 Describe the classification of psychiatric disorders and  its basis 
(neurotic vs psychotic; organic vs non-organic/functional) 
K KH N LGT/SDL Written/ Tutorial  
PS1.2 Elicit history in patient presenting with psychiatric dis order(s) S SH Y Bedside clinic, DOAP session Direct Observation  
PS1.3 Perform mental status examination (MSE) in patients prese nting with 
psychiatric disorder(s) 
S SH Y Bedside clinic, DOAP session Direct Observation  
Topic 2: Organic Psychiatric Disorders                                         Number of competencies:01                                        Number of competencies that require certification : (NIL) 
PS 2.1* Describe common Organic Psychiatric Disorders with emphasis on 
Delirium & Dementia 
K K H Y LGT/Flipped classroom Written, Tutorial  
Topic 3: Psychoactive Substance Use Disorders and other addiction disorders Number of competencies: 01                      Number of competencies that require certification : (NIL) 
PS 3.1 Describe and identify clinical presentation of abuse of alcohol, nicotine 
and other psychoactive substances prevalent in your area and their 
management. 
S, K S H , K H Y Bedside clinic, DOAP Direct observation, 
OSCE 
 
Topic 4: Schizophrenia and other Psychotic disorders Number of competencies: 01 Number of competencies that require certificat ion : (NIL) 
PS 4.1 Diagnose and manage a case of Schizophrenia at primary c are level S,K KH Y Bedside teaching Direct observation, 
OSCE 
 
T o p i c  5 :  D e p r e s s i v e  d i s o r d e r s                           N u m b e r  of competencies: 02                                                        Number of competencies that require certification : 1 
PS 5.1 Diagnose and manage case of depression at primary care l evel S SH Y Bedside teaching, role-play, 
DOAP 
OSCE, Checklist 
based Skill 
assessment 
1

112  
Number COMPETENCY 
The student should be able to 
Predominant 
Domain 
K/S/A/C 
Level 
K/KH/S 
H/P 
Core 
(Y/N) 
Suggested Teaching 
Learning method 
Suggested 
Assessment 
method 
Number 
required 
to certify 
P 
PS 5.2 Identify red flag signs of depression and refer to a spe cialist S KH/ 
SH 
Y Role play, Cine-education Checklist based Skill 
assessment 
 
Topic 6: Bipolar disorders                                                     Number of competencies: 01                                                          Nu mber of competencies that require certification : (NIL) 
PS 6.1 Diagnose and manage an episode of Mania at primary care level S SH N Bedside teaching Short answer, viva- 
voce 
 
T o p i c  7 :  A n x i e t y  D i s o r d e r s  ( i n c l u d i n g  O C D )                N u m b e rof competencies: 01                                              Number of competencies that require certification : (NIL) 
PS 7.1 Diagnose and manage anxiety disorders at primary care le vel S SH Y Bedside teaching, role-play, 
DOAP 
OSCE, Checklist 
based Skill 
assessment 
 
Topic 8: Stress related disorders                               Number of competencies:01                                                           Number of competencies that require certification : (NIL) 
PS8.1 Diagnose stress related disorders (Acute Stress Disorder and 
Adjustment Disorders) and make appropriate referral 
K SH Y Bedside clinic, 
Role play 
Skill assessment  
Topic 9: Psychosexual and Gender Identity Disorders                           Number of competencies:02                                 Number of competencies that require certification : (NIL) 
PS 9.1 Describe common psychosexual disorders K K N LGT MCQ, Wr itten, Viva 
voce 
 
PS9.2 Demonstrate knowledge of me dico-legal, societal, ethical and 
humanitarian principles on dealing with LGBTQA+ community. 
K K Y LGT/SDL MCQ, Written 
Viva voce 
 
Topic 10: Psychiatric Disorders in Childhood and Adolescence                   Number of competencies:01                   Number of competencies that require certification : (NIL) 
PS 10.1 Classify and describe disorders commonly seen in childh ood and 
adolescence with emphasis on ADHD and Autism Spectrum Disorders 
K KH Y LGT MCQ, Written 
Viva voce 
 
Topic 11: Intellectual Disability Disorder                                              Number of competencies: 01                            Number of competencies that require certification : (NIL) 
PS11.1 Describe Intellectual Disability Disorder K KH Y LGT MCQ , Written 
Viva voce 
 
Topic 12: Psychiatric Emergencies                                           Number of Competencies: 01                                                                   Number of competencies that require certification : 1

113  
Number COMPETENCY 
The student should be able to 
Predominant 
Domain 
K/S/A/C 
Level 
K/KH/S 
H/P 
Core 
(Y/N) 
Suggested Teaching 
Learning method 
Suggested 
Assessment 
method 
Number 
required 
to certify 
P 
PS12.1 Perform suicide risk assessment S SH Y Role play, bedsid e 
teaching 
Skill assessment  
01 
Topic 13: Therapeutics                                                        Number of Competencies: 01                                                        Number of competencies that require certification : (NIL) 
PS 13.1 Describe the process of modified ECT and identify misco nceptions 
associated with ECT 
K KH Y SGT observation & 
discussion, Video 
Written/ 
Viva voce

114  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DERMATOLOGY, VENEREOLOGY & LEPROSY (CODE: DR)

115  
 
 
 
Number COMPETENCY 
The student should be able to 
Predominant 
Domain 
K/S/A/C 
Level 
K/KH/S 
H/P 
Core 
(Y/N) 
Suggested Teaching 
Learning method 
Suggested 
Assessment 
method 
Number 
Requiredto 
certify 
P 
DERMATOLOGY,VENEREOLOGY& LEPROSY (Topics=15,Competencies=48) 
Topic 1: Acne Number of competencies: (02) Number of competenci es that require certification: (NIL) 
DR1.1 Recognize a patient with acne vulgaris including the risk  factors, 
etiology and clinical grading 
K/S/A KH/SH Y LGT, SGT , Bed side 
teaching, Demonstration 
Written, Tutorials, 
Direct Observation, 
OSCE 
 
DR1.2 Device a management plan of a patient with acne K KH Y LG T, SGT, Bed side teaching Written, Tutorials, 
Direct Observation, 
OSCE, Prescription 
writing 
 
Topic 2: Vitiligo Number of competencies: (01) Number of compet encies that require certification: (NIL) 
DR 2.1 Identify and differentiate vitiligo from other causes of  hypo 
pigmented lesions and present a treatment plan 
K/S KH/SH Y SGT, Bedside teaching, 
Demonstration 
Written, OSCE, 
Picture based 
MCQs 
 
Topic 3: Papulosquamous disorders Number of competencies:(03) N umber of competencies that require certification: (NIL) 
DR 3.1 Identify and distinguish psoriatic lesions from other ca uses K/S KH/SH Y SGT, Bedside teaching, 
Demonstration 
Written, OSCE, 
Picture based 
MCQs 
 
DR3.2 Demonstrate the Grattage test S SH Y Bedside teaching, 
Demonstration, DOAP 
Direct Observation, 
OSCE 
 
DR3.3 Devise a treatment plan for a patient with psoriasis and counsel the 
patient regarding various treatment options and chronicity of disease 
K/S/A/C SH Y SGT, Bedside teaching, Role 
Play 
Mini CEX, Case 
Based Discussion, 
OSCE 
 
Topic 4: Lichen Planus Number of competencies:(01) Number of co mpetencies that require certification: (NIL) 
DR 4.1 Identify and manage a case of lichen planus K/S KH/SH Y SGT, Bedside teaching, Written, OSCE,

116  
Number COMPETENCY 
The student should be able to 
Predominant 
Domain 
K/S/A/C 
Level 
K/KH/S 
H/P 
Core 
(Y/N) 
Suggested Teaching 
Learning method 
Suggested 
Assessment 
method 
Number 
Requiredto 
certify 
P 
     Demonstration Picture based 
MCQs 
 
Topic 5: Scabies Number o f competencies:(01) Number o f competencies that require certification: (NIL)
DR5.1 Devise a treatment plan for management of scabies includi ng 
adverse drug reactions 
K KH Y SGT, Bedside teaching Written, Case 
Based Discussion, 
OSCE 
 
Topic 6: Pediculosis Number o f competencies:(01) Number o f competencies that require certification: (NIL)
DR 6.1 Describe the pathogenesis, diagnostic features and management o f 
pediculosis in adults and children 
K KH Y LGT, SGT, Seminar, 
Flipped Classroom 
Written, Tutorials  
Topic 7: Fungal Infections Number o f competencies:(02) Number o f competencies that require certification: (NIL)
DR7.1 Demonstrate candida/dermatophytes in fungal scrapings on KOH 
mount 
S SH Y Bedside teaching, DOAP DOPS, OSCE  
DR7.2 Manage a case of fungal infections K KH Y LGT, SGT Written, Case 
based discussion 
 
Topic 8: Common Viral Infections Number o f competencies:(05) Number o f competencies that require certification: (NIL)
DR8.1 Describe the aetiology, microbiology, pathogenesis, clinical 
presentations and management of common viral infections of the 
skin in adults and children 
K KH Y LGT, SGT, Bed side teaching, 
Self-Directed Learning 
(SDL) 
Written, Tutorials, 
Direct Observation 
 
DR8.2 Identify and distinguish herpes simplex and herpes labial is from 
other skin lesions 
K/S KH/SH Y SGT, Bedside teaching, 
Demonstration 
Written, OSCE, 
Picture based 
MCQs 
 
DR8.3 Identify and distinguish herpes zoster and varicella from other skin 
lesions 
K/S KH/SH Y SGT, Bedside teaching, 
Demonstration 
Written, OSCE, 
Picture based 
MCQs 
 
DR8.4 Identify and distinguish viral warts from other skin lesi ons K/S KH/SH Y SGT, Bedside teaching, 
Demonstration 
Written, OSCE, 
Picture based 
MCQs 
 
DR8.5 Identify and distinguish molluscum contagiosum from other sk in K/S KH/SH Y SGT, Bedside teaching, Written, OSCE,

117  
Number COMPETENCY 
The student should be able to 
Predominant 
Domain 
K/S/A/C 
Level 
K/KH/S 
H/P 
Core 
(Y/N) 
Suggested Teaching 
Learning method 
Suggested 
Assessment 
method 
Number 
Requiredto 
certify 
P 
 lesions    Demonstration Picture based, 
MCQs 
 
Topic 9: Leprosy Number o f competencies:(06) Number o f competencies that require certification: (1)
DR9.1 Describe the epidemiology, clinical features and classifi cation 
ofLeprosy 
K KH Y LGT, SGT, Seminar, 
Flipped Classroom 
Written, Tutorials  
DR9.2 Demonstrate an appropriate neurologic examination in Lepr osy S SH Y Bedside teaching, DOAP DOPS, OSCE 2 
DR9.3 Enumerate the indications and observe the performance of a slitskin 
smear in patients with leprosy 
K KH Y SGT, Bedside teaching Written, Tutorials  
DR9.4 Effectively treat a case of Lepra Reaction K/S/A/C KH/SH Y LGT, SGT, Bed Side teaching Case Based 
Discussion, 
Prescription 
Writing, 
Direct Observation 
 
DR9.5 Effectively manage a case of Leprosy based on National Guidelines 
and WHO Guidelines 
K/S/C KH/SH Y LGT, SGT, Bed Side 
teaching, SDL 
Written, Case 
Based Discussion, 
Direct Observation, 
Prescription 
Writing 
 
DR9.6 Effectively manage complications of Leprosy and counsel r egarding 
disability and stigma 
K/S/A/C KH/SH Y LGT, SGT, 
Bed Side teaching, 
Simulations 
Written, Case 
Based Discussion, 
OSCE 
 
Topic 10: Sexually Transmitted Diseases Number of competencies: (11) Number of competencies that require certification: (NIL) 
DR10.1 Understand the rationale and Effectively use Syndromic c ase 
management for patients presenting with sexually transmitted 
diseases 
K KH Y SGT, Bedside teaching Written, Tutorials, 
OSCE 
 
DR10.2 Describe the clinical features, stages, and appropriate use of 
diagnostic tests for diagnosis of Syphilis 
K KH Y LGT, SGT, Bedside teaching Written, Tutorials, 
OSCE 
 
DR10.3 Describe the clinical features, stages, and appropriate use of 
diagnostic tests for diagnosis of non-syphilitic genital ulcer namely 
chancroid and herpes genitalis 
K KH Y LGT, SGT, Bedside teaching 
Clinic, SDL 
Written, Tutorials, 
OSCE

118  
Number COMPETENCY 
The student should be able to 
Predominant 
Domain 
K/S/A/C 
Level 
K/KH/S 
H/P 
Core 
(Y/N) 
Suggested Teaching 
Learning method 
Suggested 
Assessment 
method 
Number 
Requiredto 
certify 
P 
DR10.4 Conduct a proper examination in a patient with GUD ensuring 
privacy, confidentiality in presence of chaperone 
S/C SH Y Bedside teaching, DOAP Written, Tutorials, 
Direct observation, 
Case based 
discussion 
 
DR10.5 Effectively take sexual history and provide patient education on safe 
sexual behaviours including pretest counselling for HIV 
C SH Y Role play, 
Simulations 
OSCE, Rating scale, 
Direct observation 
and feedback 
 
DR10.6 Effectively manage syphilis and genital ulcer disease based on clinical 
features and serological tests including in pregnancy and neonates 
and advise as per syndromic case management 
K/S/A/C SH Y SGT, Bedside teaching, 
Role Play 
Case Based 
Discussion, OSCE, 
Prescription 
writing 
 
DR10.7 Recognize a patient with LGV and Donovanosis based on cl inical 
findings and provide appropriate therapy using syndromic case 
management 
K/S KH/SH Y LGT, SGT, Bedside teaching Written, OSCE, 
Direct Observation, 
Picture based 
MCQs, Prescription 
writing 
 
DR10.8 Describe the etiology, diagnostic and clinical features and 
management of gonococcal and non-gonococcal urethritis 
K KH Y LGT, SGT, Flipped 
Classroom, SDL 
Written, Tutorials  
DR10.9 Effectively manage a patie nt with urethral discharge and counsel 
regarding prevention as per syndrome case management guidelines 
K/S/A/C SH Y SGT, Bedside teaching, 
Role Play 
Case Based 
Discussion, OSCE, 
Prescription 
writing 
 
DR10.10 Diagnose and manage a patient presenting with vaginal discharge as 
per syndrome case management guidelines 
K/S/C SH Y SGT, Bedside teaching Written, Case 
Based Discussion, 
OSCE 
 
DR 10.11 Diagnose and treat a patient with genital warts and pr ovide patient 
education 
K/S/A/C SH Y LGT, Bedside teaching, 
Simulations 
Written, OSCE, 
Case based 
discussion 
 
Topic 11:HIV Number of competenci es:(02) Number of competencies  that require certification: (NIL)

119  
Number COMPETENCY 
The student should be able to 
Predominant 
Domain 
K/S/A/C 
Level 
K/KH/S 
H/P 
Core 
(Y/N) 
Suggested Teaching 
Learning method 
Suggested 
Assessment 
method 
Number 
Requiredto 
certify 
P 
DR11.1 Diagnose and manage common dermatologic manifestations of HIV 
including opportunistic infections(OI) based on clinical features and 
appropriate lab tests 
K, S KH Y LGT, Bedside teaching, SDL Written, Tutorials, 
Case based 
discussion, Written, 
OSCE, Direct 
Observation, 
Picture based 
MCQs 
 
DR11.2 Recognize common dermatological manifestations of ART drugs and 
initiate primary management appropriately 
K, C KH Y LGT, SGT, Bedside teaching, 
Flipped Classroom 
Written, Tutorials, 
OSCE, 
Written,OSCE, 
Direct Observation, 
Picture basedMCQs 
 
Topic 12 : Eczemas, Erythroderma and cutaneous adverse drug reactions Number of c o m p e t e n c i e s : ( 5 )                 N u m b e rof competencies that require certification: (NIL) 
DR12.1 Identify common types of eczema (both endogenous and exo genous 
based on clinical features and history 
K/S KH/SH Y LGT, SGT, Bedside teaching, 
Flipped Classroom 
Written, Case 
Based Discussion, 
OSCE,Picture based 
MCQs 
 
DR12.2 Provide basic management for common eczemas including topical 
and systemic therapy 
K/S KH/SH Y SGT, Bedside teaching, SDL Written, Case 
Based Discussion, 
OSCE, Prescription 
writing 
 
DR12.3 Diagnose Erythroderma, including medical complications and 
provide appropriate primary care to stabilize a patient before referral 
K,S KH/SH Y SGT, Bedside teaching, SDL Written, Tutorials, 
Case based 
discussion 
 
DR12.4 Distinguish adverse drug reactions like Fixed drug eruption, Drug 
Hypersensitivity syndrome and Steven Johnson syndrome/ Toxic 
epidermal necrolysis from other skin conditions 
K/S KH/SH Y LGT, Bedside teaching, 
Demonstrations, SDL 
Written, Tutorials, 
Case based 
discussion, OSCE 
 
DR12.5 Provide primary care in patients with Adverse drug react ions K/S/A/C KH/SH Y SGT, Bedside teaching, 
Video LGTs 
Written, Viva Voce, 
Case based 
discussion

120  
Number COMPETENCY 
The student should be able to 
Predominant 
Domain 
K/S/A/C 
Level 
K/KH/S 
H/P 
Core 
(Y/N) 
Suggested Teaching 
Learning method 
Suggested 
Assessment 
method 
Number 
Requiredto 
certify 
P 
Topic 13:Vesiculo- bullous Lesions                             Number of competencies:(02)                                         Number of competencies that require certification: (NIL) 
DR13.1 Diagnose common auto Immune vesiculo- bullous disorders like 
pemphigus and bullous pemphigoid based on clinical features and 
appropriate use of Nikolsky’s sign and Bulla spread sign 
K/S KH/SH Y LGT, SGT, Bedside teaching, 
Demonstration 
Written, Tutorials , 
Case based 
discussion, OSCE, 
Direct Observation, 
Picture based 
MCQs 
 
DR 13.2 Provide primary management for a patient with vesiculo-bullous 
disorder before referral 
K/S/A/C KH/SH Y Bedside teaching, SGT Written, Tutorials, 
Case Based 
Discussion, 
Prescription writing 
 
Topic 14 : Urticaria Angioedema                 Number of compe tencies: (03)                       Number of competencies that  require certification : (01) 
DR14.1 Classify urticaria and angioedema and describe etio-pathogenesis, 
clinical features and precipitating factors 
K KH Y LGT,SGT, Symposium Written (Short 
notes, part of 
structured essay), 
Tutorials, 
Problem solving 
exercises, OSCE 
 
DR14.2 Identify and distinguish urticaria and angioedema from other skin 
lesions and provide basic management 
K/S KH/SH Y SGT, Bedside teaching, 
Video LGT 
Written 
examination, 
Tutorials, OSCE, 
Picture based 
MCQs 
 
DR14.3 Demonstrate Dermographism S SH Y Bedside teaching, 
DOAP 
DOPS 2 
Topic 15: Pyoderma                                                                                              Number of competencies: (03)                                    Number of competencies that require certification:  (NIL) 
DR15.1 Identify the clinical presentation of various types of c utaneous 
bacterial infections 
K/S KH/SH Y Bedside teaching, 
Video LGT, 
SGT 
Written,Tutorials, 
Picture based 
MCQs, OSCE 
 
DR15.2 Enumerate the indications and adverse reactions of topic al and 
systemic drugs used in the treatment of pyoderma 
K KH Y LGT, SGT, Symposium, 
Flipped Classroom 
Written,Tutorials, 
Prescription

121  
Number COMPETENCY 
The student should be able to 
Predominant 
Domain 
K/S/A/C 
Level 
K/KH/S 
H/P 
Core 
(Y/N) 
Suggested Teaching 
Learning method 
Suggested 
Assessment 
method 
Number 
Requiredto 
certify 
P 
      writing, 
Problem solving 
exercises 
 
DR15.3 Recognize the need for surgical referral in pyoderma K K H Y Video LGT, 
Bedside teaching, SGT 
Written, Tutorials, 
OSCE

122  
LIST OF CONTRIBUTORS

123  
 
Anatomy 
 
Chairperson:Dr. Praveen R Singh,Professor of Anatomy and Medical Education,Assistant Dean, Basic Sciences Education, Convener, NMC executive committee on FDP, 
Convenor, NMC-Nodal Centre for MET,Pramukhswami Medical College,Karamsad-388325, Gujarat. 
Members: 
1. Dr. Praveen B Iyer,Professor (Additional), Department of Anatomy, Convenor, NMC Nodal CentreSeth G S Medical College, Parel, Mumbai – 400012, Maharashtra 
2. Dr. Vivek Singh Malik, Professor, Department of Anatomy, Pt. B.D. Sharma PGIMS, Rohtak, 124001, Haryana 
3. Dr. Raghunath Shahaji More, Professor, Department of Anatomy, Institute of Medical Sciences, BANARAS HINDU University, Varanasi-221005,Uttar Pradesh 
4. Dr. G Manoj Kumar Reddy, Senior Associate Professor, Department of Anatomy, Government Medical College, Kadapa, 516002, Andhra Pradesh. 
Biochemistry 
 
Chairperson: Dr.KavitaratiDharwadkar, Professor and Head, Director Clinical Biochemistry, Faculty Regional Centre for Medicaleducation Technologies, SAIMS, Sri 
Aurobindo Medical College and PGI, SAU, Indore453555, Madhya Pradesh 
Members: 
1. Dr. Vilas U. Chavan, Professor & Head, Dept of Biochemistry, SMIMER, Surat, 395010Gujarat.. 
2. Dr. Rachna Sabharwal, Professor & Head, Dept. of Biochemistry, Government Medical College, Jammu 180001, Jammu & Kashmir 
3. Dr. S P Mishra, Professor & Head, Dept. Of Biochemistry, Institute of Medical Sciences, BHU, Varanasi, 221001, Uttar Pradesh 
4. Dr. Mainak Roy, Associate Professor, Dept. of Biochemistry, Faculty, NMC Regional Centre Jorhat Medical College, Jorhat, 785001Assam.

124  
Physiology 
Chairperson: Dr. Aparna Garg, Professor and Head, Department of Physiology, Convenor, NMC- Regional Center Mahatma Gandhi Medical College and Hospital, Sitapura 
Jaipur 302022 Rajasthan. 
Members: 
1. Dr. Debasish Chakraborty, Professor, Department of Physiology, Agartala Govt. Medical College Kunjavan, Agartala 799006Tripura (West). 
2. Dr. Ravi Kaushik, Associate Professor, Department of Physiology, Maulana Azad Medical College & Associated Hospitals, New Delhi- 110002. 
3. Dr. Tripti Waghmare, Professor, Department of Physiology, JNMC, DMIHER(DU), Sawangi (M), Wardha, 442001, Maharashtra 
4. Dr. Rajiva Kumar Singh, Prof & HOD, Department of Physiology, Government of Bihar , Patna Medical college Patna 800004, Bihar. 
 
 
Microbiology 
Chairperson: Dr. Namrata Kumari, Professor and Head, Department of Microbiology, Convenor, NMC Regional Centre (RC-MET), Indira Gandhi Institute of Medical 
Sciences, Patna- 800014 , Bihar. 
Members: 
1. Dr. Suman Singh, Professor and He ad, Department of Microbiology , Co-Convenor, NMC Nodal Centre, Pramukh Swami medical College,  Karamsad -388325, 
Gujarat. 
2. Dr. Purnima Barua, Former Convenor, NMC Regional Centre- Jorhat, Professor, Department of Micro biology, Tinsukia Medical College, Tinsukia- 786146, Assam. 
3. Dr. Amresh Kumar Singh, Associate professor and Head, Department of Microbiology, Member, Medical Education Unit, BRD Medical College, Gorakhpur-273013, 
Uttar Pradesh 
4. Dr. M R Vasanthapriyan, Associate Professor, Institute of Microbiology, Member, NMC Regional Centre (RC-MET),Madurai Medical College Madurai-625020, 
Tamil Nadu 
Pathology 
Chairperson: Dr. Mrs. SunitaVagha, Professor and Controller of Examination, Department of Pathology, Jawaharlal Nehru Medical College DMIHER, SawangiMeghe, Wardha- 
442005, Maharashtra 
Members: 
1. Dr. Cherry Shah, Professor and Dean, Department of Pathology, Smt NHL Municipal Medical College, Ahmadabad- 380014, Gujarat 
2. Dr. V. Geeta, Professor and HOD, Department of Pathology, Kakatiya Medical College, Warangal- 506007, Telangana

125  
3. Dr. K. Chandramouleeswari, Professor and Head, Institute of Child Health, Madras Medical College, Chennai- 600008, Tamil Nadu 
4. Dr. Anirudha V Kushtagi, Professor and Head, Department of Pathology, Koppal Institute of Medical Sciences, Koppal- 583231, Karnataka 
 
Pharmacology 
Chairperson: Dr. Dinesh Kuma Badyal, Vice Principal (Med Edu), Professor & Head, Department of Pharmacology, National Convener, NMC-Advance Course in Medical 
Education, Convener, NMC Nodal Center for Faculty Development, Member-NMC National Curriculum Committee, Christian Medical Col lege, Ludhiana- 
141008, Punjab 
Members: 
1. Dr. Shipra Jain, Professor, Dept of Pharmacology, MEU Resource Faculty, NMC-RC, Mahatma Gandhi Medical College & Hospital Jaipur-302022 Rajasthan. 
2. Dr .Trupti Rekha Swain, Prof and Head, Dept of Pharmacology, MEU Faculty member, NMC Regional Centre, S C B Medical College, Cuttack, 753007,Odisha. 
3. Dr. Juhi Kalra,Professor, Department of Pharmacology, Convenor, NMC Regional Centre, Himalayan Institute of Medical Sciences (HIMS),Dehradun-248001,Uttarakhand 
4 Dr. Ashish Yadav, Professor a nd Head, Department of Pharmacology, UNS Autonomous State Medical College, Jaunpur - 222003, Uttar Pradesh. 
 
Forensic Medicine & Toxicology 
Chairperson: Dr Sandeep Sitaram Kadu, Controller of Examination s, Maharashtra University of Health Sciences, Nashik,422004, Maharashtra. 
Members: 
1. Dr. Rajesh Kumar Baranwal, Professor(FMT) & Principal, Maharshi Devraha Baba Autonomous State, Medical College, Deoria 274001, Uttar Pradesh. 
2. Dr.RaktimPratimTamuli, Associate Professor, Dept. of Forensic Medicine and Toxicology, Gauhati Medical College, Guwahati - 781032, Assam 
3. Dr. Venkatesan M, Associate Prof essor, Sri Ramachandra Medical College and Research Institute, Porur, Chennai 600116, Tamil Nadu 
4. Dr. Sanjoy Das, Professor & Head, Forensic Medicine & Toxicology, Himalayan Institute of Medical Sciences, Jolly Grant, Dehradun- 248140, Uttarakhand 
 
Community Medicine 
Chairperson: Dr. Dr. Annarao Kulkarni, Professor and Head, Community Medicine, Sri Madhusudan Sai Institute of Medical Sciences and Research Muddenahalli: 562101, 
Chikkaballapur District, Karnataka 
Members: 
1. Dr. Pankaj B. Shah, Associate Dean Research, Professor, Department of Community Medicine, SRMC & RI, Sri Ramachandra Institute of Higher Education & Research 
(SRIHER), NMC Executive Committee member of FDP, Member DOME, NMC SRMC Nodal center, Porur, Chennai 600116, Tamil Nadu, 
2. Dr. Gaurav Kamboj, Associate Professor, Dept of Community Medicine, Deputy Dean (Academics), Kalpana Chawla Government Medical College, Karnal- 132001 
Haryana 
3. Dr.Shib Sekhar Datta, Prof. and Head, Department of Community Medicine, Tripura Medical College & Dr. BRAM Teaching Hospital Agartala, 799014,Tripura 
4. Dr. Abhishek V Raut, Professor, Department of Community Medicine, Mahatma Gandhi Institute of Medical Sciences, Sevagram, 442102, Maharashtra

126  
Ophthalmology 
Chairperson: Dr Viswamithra P, Professor of Ophthalmology, GMC, Paderu, Former HOD of Ophthalmology, Andhra Medical College, Faculty, NMC Regional Centre, Addl 
DME& Superintendent, GGH, Paderu, ASR District-Pin Code 531024, Andhra Pradesh . 
Members: 
1. Dr. Radha Ishwar Dass, Associate professor, Ophthalmology, M P Shah govt medical college. Jamnagar, Gujarat. 
2. Dr. K. Kavitha, Professor & Head of Ophthalmology, Madurai Medical college, Madurai, 62t5017, Tamil Nadu 
3. Dr. Jisha K, Professor, Department of Ophthalmology, Govt Medical college, Gandhinagar, PO Kottayam 68600Kerala 
4. Dr. Nitin Nema, Professor in Department of Ophthalmology, and Convener, NMC Regional Center for MET, Sri Aurobindo Medical College & Postgraduate Institute, 
Indore, 453555, Maharashtra 
5. Dr. Suneetha N, Professor and Head, Dept of Ophthalmology, St John's Medical College, Bangalore 560034, Karnataka 
 
Otorhinolaryngology 
Chairperson: Dr. T. Indra, Professor of ENT, Member MEU, Madras Medical College, Rajiv Gandhi Government General HospitalChennai.600003, Tamil Nadu 
Members: 
1. Dr. Saurabh Gandhi, Associate Pr ofessor, NHL Municipal Medical College, Faculty, Nodal Center, Ahmedabad, Gujarat 
2. Dr. Vishwambhar Singh, Professor department of Otorhinolaryngology, Institute of Medical Science, Banaras Hindu University, Varanasi 221005, Uttar Pradesh 
3. Dr.Subhabrata Sengupta, Professor Department of ENT, Faculty Member NMC Regional Centre, ESIC P GIMSR & Medical College,Joka, 700104, Kolkata 
4. Dr. Sridhara S, Associate professor and head of the department, Shivamogga institute of medical sciences, Shimoga. Karnataka. 
 
General Medicine 
Chairperson: Dr. P.V.Balamurugan, Professor, Department of medi cine, Co-Convenor, NMC Regional Centre, Madurai Medical CollegeMadurai-625020, Tamil Nadu. 
Members: 
1. Dr. Santosh B Salagre, Professor and Unit Head, Department of Medicine, Co-Convenor, NMC Nodal Centre, Seth G S Medical College, Mumbai - 400012, Maharashtra. 
2. Dr. Mehjabin Hirani, Associate Professor and Unit Head, Department of Medicine, MPSGMC, Jamnagar-361008, Gujarat. 
3. Dr. Sudhir Kumar, Professor and Unit head, Department of General Medicine, Co-convenor, NMC Regional Centre, IGIMS, Patna, Bihar. 
Bihar - 800001. 
4. Dr. Neeraj Manikath, Assistant professor, Department of Medicine, Member NMC Regional Centre, GMCH Kozhikode, 673008, Kerala.

127  
Pediatrics 
Chairperson: Dr Jayant Vagha, Professor, Paediatrics, JNMC, Wardha, 442001, Maharashtra, 
Members: 
1. Dr. Kundan Mittal, Professor, Pediatrics, PGIAMS, Rohtak, Haryana. 
2. Dr. Munish Kakkar, Professor and Head, Pediatrics, MGUMST, Jaipur, Rajasthan. 
3. Dr. Kumar Angadi, Associate Professor and HOD, Pediatrics, YIMS, Yadgir, Karnataka. 
 
Psychiatry 
Chairperson: Dr. Sujata Sethi, Senior Professor, Department of Psychiatry & Co-convenor NMC Regional Center, Pt. B.D. Sharma PGIMS, Rohtak 124001, Haryana 
Members: 
1. Dr. Rajesh Kumar, Professor and H ead, Department of Psychiatry , IGIMS Patna 800014, Bihar 
2. Dr. BheemsainTekkalaki, Associate Professor, Department of Psychiatry, Faculty, NMC Regional Center, KAHER’s J. N Medical College, Belagavi, 590010 Karnataka 
3. Dr. Smitha C A, Associate Professor, Department of Psychiatry,  Faculty, NMC Regional Centre, Govt. Medical College Kozhikode – 673008, Kerala 
4. Dr. Nilima Shah, Associate Professor, Department of Psychiatry, Faculty, NMC Regional Centre, NHL Municipal Medical College, A hmedabad 380006, Gujarat 
Dermatology, Venereology & Leprosy 
Chairperson: Dr Abhilasha Williams, Professor of Dermatology, Vice Principal- UG Academics, Member, NMC Nodal Center for Medical Education, Christian Medical College 
& Hospital, Ludhiana, 141008, Punjab. 
Members: 
1. Dr. Ishwara Bhat, Professor of Dermatology, Member, NMC Nodal C enter for Medical Education, St John’s Medical College Hospital, Bangalore. 560034, Karnataka 
2. Dr.C.Dharmambal, Professor of DVL, CC member MMC – Regional center, Rajiv Gandhi Govt.General Hospital, Madras Medical College, Chennai – 600003, Tamil Nadu 
3. Dr. Chaitanya Namdeo, Professor, Department of Dermatology, Venereology & Leprosy, Sri Aurobindo Medical College & PGI, Indore 453555, Maharashtra 
Obstetrics & Gynaecology 
Chairperson: Dr. Anju Agarwal, Professor and Head, Department of Ob/Gyn, KGMU, Lucknow, Member, NMC Nodal Centre, King George Medical University, Lucknow 
226003 , Uttar Pradesh 
Members: 
1. Dr. Isukapalli Vani, Professor and Head, Department of OBG, co-Convenor, NMC regional Centre, Andhra Medical College, Visakhapatnam- 530002, Andhra Pradesh 
2. Dr.M. Laxmi Prasanna, Professor and HOD, OBG department, GGH, NIZAMABAD, 503001, Telangana. 
3. Dr.Samrat Chakrabarti, Associate Professor, Medical College Kolkata, 88, College Street,Kolkata-700073,West Bengal

128  
General Surgery 
 
Chairperson: Dr Shailesh Kumar, Director Professor of surgery, ABVIMS Dr RML Hospital New Delhi.110001 
Members: 
1. Dr. C Gangalakshmi, MS, Professor of General Surgery, Madurai Medical College, Madurai, Tamil Nadu 
2. Dr. Satyendra Kumar Tiwary, Professor, Institute of Medical Sciences, Banaras Hindu University, Varanasi, Uttar Pradesh 
3. Dr. K Rojaramani, Professor of General surgery, Sri Venkateswara medical college, Tirupati Andhra Pradesh 
4. Dr. D. Mohan Das, M.S., Principal/Additional Director Of Medical Medication, Government Medical College,Narsampet, Warangal District, Telangana 
 
Orthopaedics 
Chairperson: Dr Gyaneshwar Tonk, Professor & Head, Department of orthopaedics, Member MEU, LLRM Medical college, Meerut, Uttar Pradesh 
Members: 
1. Dr. G V S Moorthy, Professor & Head, Department of Orthopaedics, Bhaskara Medical College, Telangana 
2. Dr. S K Saidapur, Professor Orthopaedics, JNMC, Belagavi, Karnataka 
3. Dr. Umesh Yadav, Associate Professor, Department of Orthopaedics, PGI, Rohtak, Haryana 
4. Dr.Vijendra Chauhan, Professor Orthopaedics & Director General, Academic Development SRHU, Ex Vice Chancellor and & Dean, HIMS, Baniyawala Jolly Grant, 
Dehradun, Uttarakhand 
 
Anaesthesiology 
Chairperson:Dr. G. Madhavi, Associate Professor, Department of Anaesthesiology, Member, Curriculum committee, Faculty, NMC Regional Centre, Gandhi Medical 
College, Secunderabad-500003, Telangana. 
Members: 
1. Dr. Dhrubajyoti Sarkar, Professor & Head, Department of Anaesthesiology, Member,MEU, College of Medicine & JNM Hospital, Kalyani- 741235 West Bengal. 
2. Dr. Prashant Kumar, Professor, Department of Anaesthesiology, Member, NMC Regional Centre, Pt BD Sharma PGIMS, Rohtak-124001, Haryana. 
3. Dr. Radhika. K. P., Professor, Department of Anaesthesiology, Member, Curriculum committee, Member, Institutional Research committee, Govt Medical College, Kozhikode 
-673008, Kerala. 
 
Radiodiagnosis 
Chairperson: Dr Subathra Adithan, Additional Professor, Department of Radiodiagnosis, Faculty, NMC Nodal Centre, Jawaharlal Institute of Postgraduate Medical Education and

129  
Research (JIPMER), Puducherry - 605006 
Members: 
1.  Dr. Gaurav Mishra, Professor, Department of Radiodiagnosis, Jawaharlal Nehru Medical College; Pro Vice Chancellor, Datta Meghe Institute  
of Higher Education and Research (deemed to be university), War dha – 442001 Maharashtra 
2. Dr. Ila Dushyant Desai, Professor and Head, Department of Radiodiagnosis, BJ Medical College and Civil hospital, Ahmedabad – 380016 Gujarat 
3. Dr. Ashish Verma, Professor, Department of Radiodiagnosis and Imaging, Institute of Medical Sciences, Banaras Hindu University, Varanasi – 221005 Uttar Pradesh

1 
NATIONAL  MEDICAL  COMMISSION 
COMPETENCY  BASED  UNDERGRADUATE CURRICULUM 
FOR 
THE  INDIAN  MEDICAL  GRADUATE 
Volume III-2024

2 
COMPETENCY BASED UNDERGRADUATE CURRICULUM 
FOR  THE 
INDIAN MEDICAL GRADUATE 
2024 
 
 
National Medical Commission 
Pocket-14, Sector- 8, Dwarka 
New Delhi 110 077

3  
  
FOREWORD 
 
 
The National Medical Commission (N MC) was created on 24th Septe mber, 2020 by the Act of Parliament replacing the erstwhile Med ical 
Council of India and Board of Gove rnors. The foundation for making of an Indian Medical Gradua te (‘Doctor’) depends on buildin g a sound base of 
medical education. In the year  2019, a committ ed team appointed  by erstwhile MCI revolutionized the age-old didactic teaching system in Indian 
medical colleges by bringing in  Competency Based Medical Educat ion (CBME). This unique approach has raised the level of medica l education with 
respect to quality, versatility and horizontal- vertical alignment of all subjects. The mandate of NMC to see that the first l ine of health care leaders who 
reach out to the common masses empathizing with the problems of  the rural populace are being met with. The two-pronged approac h of increasing the 
quantity and improving the quality of medical education is being tackled with this approach. 
 
Education has now become student -centric and patient-centric in stead of pedagogic system. The first batch of students have now  completed 
their training under CBME imple mented in 2019. It was a demand from actively involved academia to revisit the curriculum and m odify it so as to 
keep abreast at international le vel. Interim years of covid pan demic also were ‘a good teaching academy’ for all. Increasing i nfluence of artificial

4  
 
intelligence on student community, matched with rising cost of medical education and competitiveness, instead of accommodative , helping and 
balanced approach, has led to increasing risk of losing social intelligence and humane approach a midst the emerging doctors. T he risk of creating 
overqualified clerks looms large on our medical system. 
 
A national team of experienced as well as emerging empathetic and talented teachers engaged as full-time faculty in various medical institutions 
were invited by the Undergraduate Education Board (UGMEB) of the NMC to invest their extra energy and hours to assess the curricula, examinations, 
AETCOM, vertical and horizontal integration of various subjects and bring in modifications. Each subject had committee of five persons on an average, 
from different parts of the country. Totally 93 experts have gi ven their valuable time and energy in framing this new curricul um and all three volumes, 
prepared by their predecessors in 2019. The hard work done by them was the base on which this edifice has further been refined. 
 
We are sure that fraternity and students are going to have an e ducational journey that will be full of fun, knowledge and expe rience sharing. 
UGMEB of the NMC acknowledges each  and every one involved in th e process, named and unsung heroes who have been the part of th is exercise of 
bringing the document to the readers. 
 
 
 
Dr. Aruna V. Vanikar, President, 
Dr. Vijayendra Kumar, Member, 
UGMEB, NMC

5  
Contents Volume I 
 
S.No. Subject Legend PageNo. 
(i) How to use the Manual 
 
8 
(ii) Definitions used in the Manual 
 
28 
(iii) Subject wise Competencies 
  
1. Anatomy AN 32 
2. Physiology PY 74 
3. Biochemistry BC 86 
4. Pharmacology PH 98 
5. Pathology PA 111 
6. Microbiology MI 130 
7. Forensic Medicine & Toxicology FM 140 
(iv) List of contributing subject experts 
 
160

6  
Contents Volume II 
 
S.No. Subject Legend PageNo. 
(i) Howto use the Manual  8 
(ii) Definitions used in the Manual  28 
(iii) Subject wise Competencies   
1. Community Medicine CM 32 
2. General Medicine GM 44 
3. Paediatrics PE 92 
4. Psychiatry PS 114 
5. Dermatology, Venereology & Leprosy DE 118 
(iv) List of contributing subject experts  125

7  
Contents Volume III 
 
S.No. Subject Legend PageNo. 
(i) How to use the Manual  8 
(ii) Definitions used in the Manual  28 
(iii) Subject wise Competencies   
1. General Surgery SU 32 
2. Ophthalmology OP 44 
3. Otorhinolaryngology EN 50 
4. Obstetrics & Gynaecology OG 57 
5. Orthopaedics’ OR 74 
6. Anaesthesiology AS 82 
7. Radiodiagnosis RT 87 
(iv) List of contributing subject experts  91

8  
How to use the Manual 
 
This Manual is intended for curric ulum planners in an instituti on to design learning and assessment experiences for the MBBS s tudent. Contents created 
bysubject experts have been curated to provide guidance for the curriculum planners, leaders and teachers in medical schools. The manual must be used withreference 
to and in the context of the Regulations. 
Section 1 
 
Competencies for the Indian Medical Graduate 
 
Section 1 - provides the Roles (global competencies) extracted from the Competency Based Medical Education (CBME) Guidelines, 2024. The global competencies 
identified asdefining the roles of the Indian Medical Graduate are the broad competencies that the learner must aspire to achieve, teachers and curriculum plannersmust 
ensure that the learning experiences are aligned to this Manual. 
Extract from the Competency Based Medical Education (CBME) Guidelines, 2024 
 
2. Objectives of the Indian Gradua te Medical Training Programme 
 
The undergraduate medical educati on program is designed with a goal to create an "Indian Medical Graduate" (IMG) possessing re quisite knowledge, skills, 
attitudes, values and responsiveness, so that she or he may function appropriately and effectively as a physician of first contact of the community while being globally 
relevant. To achieve this, the following national and institutional goals for the learner of the Indian Medical Graduate train ing program are hereby advocated. The first 
contact physician needs to be skilful to perform duties of prim ary care physician and have requisite skills for promotive, pre ventative, rehabilitative, palliative care & 
referral services.

9  
2.1 National Goals 
 
At the end of undergraduate program, the Indian Medical Graduate should be able to: 
 
a. Recognize "health for all" as a national goal and health right of all citizens and by undergoing training for medical profession to fulfill his social obligations 
towards realization of this goal. 
b. Learn key aspects of National policies on health and devote himself to its practical implementation. 
 
c. Achieve competence in the practice of holistic medicine, enc ompassing promotive, preventive, curative and rehabilitative aspects of common diseases. 
 
d. Develop scientific temper, acqui re educational experience for proficiency in profession and promote healthy living. 
 
e. Become an exemplary citizen by observance of medical ethics and fulfilling social and professional obligations, so as to respond to national aspirations. 
 
2.2 Institutional Goals 
 
In consonance with the national goal s, each medical institution should evolve institutional goals to define the kind of traine d manpower (or professionals) they 
intend to produce. The Indian M edical Graduates coming out of a  medical institute should be competent in diagnosis and managem ent of common health problems 
of the individual and the community, commensurate with his/her position as a member of the heal th team at the primary, seconda ry or tertiary levels, using his/her 
clinical skills based on history, physical examination and relevant investigations. 
a. Be competent for working in the h ealth care team from Phase I M BBS to Compulsory rotatory medical internship (CRMI) in a gradu al manner with 
increasing complexity in an integrated multi-department involvement. 
b. Be competent to practice preventive, promotive, curative, palliative and rehabilitativeꞏ medicine in respect to the commonly encountered health problems. 
 
c. Appreciate rationale for different therapeutic modalities; be familiar with the administration of the "essential medicines" and their common adverse effects.

10 
d. Appreciate the socio-psychological, cultural, economic and envi ronmental factors affecting health and develop humane attitude towards the patients in 
discharging one's professional responsibilities. 
e. Possess the attitude for continued self-learning and to seek further expertise or to pursue research in any chosen area of medicine, action research and 
documentation skills. 
f. Be familiar with the basic factors which are essential for the implementation of the National Health Programs including practical aspects of the following: 
 
i. Family Welfare and Maternal and Child Health (MCH); 
 
ii. Sanitation and water supply; 
 
iii. Prevention and control of c ommunicable and non-communicable diseases; 
 
iv. Immunization; 
 
v. Health Education and advocacy; 
 
vi. Indian Public Health Standards  (IPHS) at various level of service delivery; 
 
vii. Bio-medical waste disposal; 
 
viii. Organizational and or institutional arrangements. 
 
g. Acquire basic management skills in the area of human resources,  materials and resource management related to health care deliv ery, general and 
hospitalmanagement, principal inventory skills and counselling. 
h. Be able to identify community health problems and learn to work to resolve these by designing, instituting corrective steps and evaluating outcome of such

11 
measures with maximum community participation. 
 
i. Be able to work as a leading partner in health care teams and acquire proficiency in communication skills. 
 
j. Be competent to work in a variety of health care settings. 
 
k. Have personal characteristics and attitudes required for professional life including personal integrity, sense of responsibility, dependability, and ability to 
relate to or show concern for other individuals. 
All efforts must be made to equip the medical graduates to acqu ire certifiable skills as given in comprehensivelist of skills recommended as desirable for 
Bachelor of Medicine and Bachelor of Surgery (MBBS)Indian Medical Graduate, as given in theGraduate Medical Education Regulations. 
2.3 Goals for the Learner 
 
In order to fulfil these goals, the Indian Medical Graduate must be able to function in the following roles appropriately and effectively:- 
 
a. Clinician who understands and pr ovides preventive, promotive, curative, palliative and holistic care with compassion. 
 
b. Leader and member of the health  care team and system with capabilities to collect, analyse, synthesize and communicate health data appropriately. 
 
c. Communicate with patients,  families, colleagues, community a nd community in a methodological and skilful way using various approaches in family 
visits, family adoption program, clinic-social cases, clinical cases and AETCOM training programs. 
d. Lifelong learner committed to  continuous improvement of skills and knowledge. 
 
e. Professional, who is committed to excellence, is ethical, re sponsive and accountable to patient s, community, profession, an d society. Training of 
humanities and social sciences will be useful for this training.

12 
3. Competency Based Training Programme of the Indian Medical Graduate 
Competency based learning would include designing and implement ing medical education. Curriculum that focuses on the desired a nd observable activity in 
real life situations. In order to effectively fulfil the roles,  the Indian Medical Graduate woul d have obtained the following set of competencies at the time of 
graduation: 
3.1 Clinician, who understands and provides preventive, promotive, curative, palliative and holistic care with compassion. 
 
3.1.1 Demonstrate knowledge of norma l human structure, function and d evelopment from a molecular, cellular, biological, clinical, be havioral and social 
perspective. 
3.1.2 Demonstrate knowledge of abnormal human structure, function and development from a molecular, cellular, biological, clinical, behavioral and social 
perspective. 
3.1.3 Demonstrate knowledge of medico-legal, societal, ethical and humanitarian principles that influence healthcare. 
 
3.1.4 Demonstrate knowledge of nati onal and regional health care poli cies including the National Health Mission that incorporates Na tional Rural Health 
Mission (NRHM) and National Urban Health Mission (NUHM), framew orks, economics and systems that influence health promotion, he alth care 
delivery, disease prevention, effectiveness, responsiveness, quality and patient safety. 
3.1.5 Demonstrate ability to elicit and record from the patient, and other relevant sources including relatives and caregivers, a hi story that is complete and 
relevant to disease identification, disease prevention and health promotion. 
3.1.6 Demonstrate ability to elicit and record from the patient, and other relevant sources including relatives and caregivers, a hi story that is contextual to 
gender, age, vulnerability, social and economic status, patient preferences, beliefs and values. 
3.1.7 Demonstrate ability to perform a physical examination that is complete and relevant to disease identification, disease prevention and health promotion.

13 
3.1.8 Demonstrate ability to perform a physical examination that is contextual to gender, social and economic status, patient preferences and values. 
 
3.1.9 Demonstrate effective clinical  problem solving, judgment and ab ility to interpret and integrate available data in order to add ress patient problems, 
generate differential diagnoses and develop individualized management plans that include preventive, promotive and therapeutic goals. 
3.1.10 Maintain accurate, clear and appropriate record of the patient in conformation with legal and administrative frameworks. 
 
3.1.11 Demonstrate ability to choose t he appropriate diagnostic tests and interpret these tests based on scientific validity, cost ef fectiveness and clinical 
context. 
3.1.12 Demonstrate ability to prescri be and safely administer appropri ate therapies including nutriti onal interventions, pharmacother apy and interventions 
based on the principles of rati onal drug therapy, scientific va lidity, evidence and cost that conform to established national and regional health 
programmes and policies for the following: 
i. Disease prevention, 
 
ii. Health promotion and cure, 
 
iii. Pain and distress alleviation, and 
 
iv. Rehabilitation and palliation. 
 
3.1.13 Demonstrate ability to provide a continuum of care at the primary (including home care) and/or secondary level that addresses chronicity, mental and 
physical disability, 
3.1.14 Demonstrate ability to appropriately identify and refer patients who may requireꞏ specialized or advanced tertiary care. 
 
3.1.15 Demonstrate familiarity with basic, clinical and translational research as it applies to the care of the patient.

14 
3.2 Leader and member of the health care team and system 
 
3.2.1 Work effectively and appropriately with colleagues in an inter- professional health care team respecting diversity of roles, re sponsibilities and 
competencies of other professionals. 
3.2.2 Recognize and function effectively, responsibly and appropriately as a health care team leader in primary and secondary health care settings. 
 
3.2.3 Educate and motivate other mem bers of the team and work in a co llaborative and collegial fashion that will help maximize the h ealth care delivery 
potential of the team. 
3.2.4 Access and utilize components of the health care system and hea lth delivery in a_ manner that is appropriate, cost effective, fair and in compliance 
with the national health care priorities and policies, as well as be able to collect, analyse and utilize health data. 
3.2.5 Participate appropriately and effectively in measures that will advance quality of health care and patient safety within the health care system. 
 
3.2.6 Recognize and advocate health promotion, disease prevention and health care quality improvement through prevention and early recognition: in a) life 
style diseases and b) cancer, in collaboration with other members of the health care team. 
3.3 Communicator with patients, families, colleagues and community 
 
3.3.1 Demonstrate ability to communicate adequately, sensitively, effectively and respectfully with patients, families, colleagues and community in a language 
that patients, families, colleagues and community understands and in a manner that will improve patient patients, families, colleagues and community 
satisfaction and health care outcomes. 
3.3.2 Demonstrate ability to establish professional relationships with patients, families, colleagues and community that are positive, understanding, humane, 
ethical, empathetic, and trustworthy. 
3.3.3 Demonstrate ability to communicate with patients, families, colleagues and community in a manner respectful of patient’s preferences, values, prior

15 
experience, beliefs, confidentiality and privacy. 
 
3.3.4 Demonstrate ability to communicate with patients, colleagues and families in a manner that encourages participation and shared decision- making 
and overcoming hesitancy towards health initiatives. 
3.4 Lifelong learner committed to continuous improvement of skills and knowledge 
 
3.4.1 Demonstrate ability to perform an objective self-assessment of knowledge and skills, continue learning, refine existing skills and acquire new skills. 
 
3.4.2 Demonstrate ability to apply newly gained knowledge or skills to the care of the patient. 
 
3.4.3 Demonstrate ability to introspect and utilize experiences, to enhance personal and professional growth and learning. 
 
3.4.4 Demonstrate ability to search (including through electronic means), and critically re- evaluate the medical literature and apply the information in the 
care of the patient. 
3.4.5 Be able to identify and select an appropriate career pathway that is professionally rewarding and personally fulfilling. 
 
3.5 Professional who is committed to excellence, is ethical, responsive and accountable to patients, the profession and community. 
 
3.5.1 Practice selflessness, integrity, responsibility, accountability and respect. 
 
3.5.2 Respect and maintain professional boundaries between patients, colleagues and society. 
 
3.5.3 Demonstrate ability to recognize and manage ethical and professional conflicts. 
 
3.5.4 Abide by prescribed ethical and legal codes of conduct and practice. 
 
3.5.5 Demonstrate commitment to the growth of the medical profession as a whole.

16 
Section 2 
Subject-wise competencies 
 
Section 2 contains subject-wise competencies that must be achieved at the end of instruction in that subject. These are organised intables. 
 
Competencies (Outcomes) in each subject are grouped according to topics number-wise. It is important to review the individual competencies inthe light of the 
topic outcomes as a whole. For each competency outlined - the l earning domains (Knowledge, Skill, Attitude, Communication) are  identified.The expected level of 
achievement in that subject is identified as – [knows (K), knows how (KH), shows how (SH), perform (P)]. As a rule, ‘perform’indicates independent performance without 
supervision and is required rarely in the pre-internship period. The competency is a core (Y - must achieve) or anon-core (N - desirable) outcome. Suggested learning 
and assessment methods (these ar e suggestions) and explanation of the terms used are given under thesection “definitions used in this document”. The suggested 
number of times a skill must be performed independently for certification in the learner’s logbook is also given. 
The number of topics and competencies in each subject are given below:

17 
Topics and competencies in Phase 1 & Phase 2 subjects (Volume I) 
 
Sr. No. Subjects Number of topics Number of 
competencies 
1. Anatomy 82 413 
2. Physiology 12 136 
3. Biochemistry 14 84 
4. Pharmacology 10 92 
5. Pathology 35 182 
6. Microbiology 11 74 
7. Forensic Medicine 14 158 
 
Total 178 1139

18 
Topics andcompetencies in Medicine and Allied subjects (Volume II) 
 
 
Sr. No. Subjects Number of topics Number of 
competencies 
1. Community Medicine 20 136 
2. General Medicine 29 525 
3. Paediatrics 35 406 
4. Psychiatry 13 17 
5. Dermatology, Venereology & Leprosy 15 48 
 
Total 112 1132

19 
Topics and competencies in Surgery and Allied subjects (Volume III) 
 
Sr. No. Subjects Number of topics Number of 
competencies 
1. General Surgery 30 133 
2. Ophthalmology 10 60 
3. Otorhinolaryngology 04 63 
4. Obstetrics & Gynaecology 38 141 
5. Orthopaedics’ 14 40 
6. Anaesthesiology 11 52 
7. Radiodiagnosis 07 21 
 
Total 114 510

20 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Understanding the competencies table

21 
Understandingthecompetenciestable 
 
A B C D E F G H 
 
No. Competencies Domain K/KH/SH/P Core Suggested
Teaching 
Suggested
Assessment 
No. 
requiredto 
     LearningMethod method certif y (P) 
Physiology 
PY1.1 
 
 
IM 4.10 
 
Describethestructureand 
functions of a 
Elicit document and 
presentamedicalhistory S 
thathelpsdelineatethe 
 
 
KH Y 
 
SH Y 
 
LGT, SGT 
 
BedSideclinic, 
DOAP 
 
Written/Viva 
 
OSCE, 
Direct 
observation 
 
Descriptionofcompetency  
competencyiscoreor 
 
 
desirable 
Identifiesifthe 
 
.Uniquenumberofthecompetency 
 
Identifiesthedomain 
YindicatesCore; 
N-non-core 
 
 
Number of times a 
Skill needstobedone 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LGT-Large group teaching; SGT-Small group teaching; OSCE-Objective structured clinical examination; P- indicate how many competencies/competencies must be done independently under 
observation for Certification. *Numbers given are for illustra tive purposes only and should not be compared with the same in curriculum documents; 
K 
3

22 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Deriving learning objectives from competencies

23

24 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Deriving learning methods from competencies

25

26 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Deriving assessment methods from competencies

27

28 
Definitions used in the Manual 
1. Goal: A projected state of affairs that a person or system plans to achieve. 
In other words: Where do you want to go? or What do you want to become? 
2. Competency: The habitual and judicious use of communication, knowledge, technical skills, clinical reasoning, emotions, values, and reflection in daily 
practice for the benefit of the individualand community being served. 
In other words: What should you have? Or What should have changed? 
3. Objective: Statement of what a learner should be able to do at the end of as pecific learning experience. In other words: What the Indian Medical 
Graduate should know, do, or behave. 
Action Verbs used in this manual 
 
Knowledge Skill Attitude/communicate 
Enumerate Identify Counsel 
List Demonstrate Inform 
Describe Perform und er supervision Demonstrate understanding of  
Discuss Perform independently Communicate
Differentiate Document  
Define Present  
Classify Record  
Choose Elicit  
Interpret   
Report

29 
Note: 
1. Specified essential competencies only will be required to be performed independently at the end of the final year M BBS. 
2. The word ‘perform’ or ‘do’ isused ONLY if the task has to be done on patients or in laboratory practical in the pre/para-clinical phases. 
3. Most tasks that require performance during undergraduate years will be performed under supervision. 
4. If a certification to perform independently has been done, then the number of times the task has to be performed under 
supervision will be indicated in the last column. 
Explanation of terms used in this manual 
 
LGT  (LGT)    Any instructional large group method including interactive lecture 
SGT (SGT) Any instructional method involving small groups of students in an appropriate 
learning context 
DOAP (Demonstration-Observation- 
Assistance-Performance) 
A practical session that allows the student to observe a demonstration, assist the 
performer, perform in a simulated environment, perform under supervision or 
perform independently 
Skill assessment/ Direct observation A session that assesses the skill of the student including those in the practical 
laboratory, skillslab, skills station that uses mannequins/papercase/simulated 
patients/real patients as the context demands 
DOPS (Directly observed procedural 
skills) 
DOPS is a method of assessment for assessing competency of the students in 
which the examiner directly observes the student performing procedure 
Core A competency that is necessary in order to complete the requirements of the subject 
(traditional must know) 
Non-Core A competency that is optional in order to complete the requirements of the 
subject (traditional nice (good) to know/ desirable to know) 
National Guidelines Health programs as relevant to the competen cy that are part of the National Health   
Program

30 
 
Domains of learning 
 
 
K Knowledge 
S Skill 
A Attitude 
C Communication 
 
Levels of competency 
 
K Knows Acknowledge attribute-Usuallyenumeratesordescribes 
KH Knows how A higher level of knowledge-isabletodiscussoranaly ze 
SH Showshow A skill attribute is able to interpret/demonstrateacomplex 
procedure requiring thought, knowledge and behavior 
P Performs (under 
supervision or 
independently) 
Mastery for the level of competence - When done 
independently under supervision a pre-specified number of 
times - certification or capacity to perform independently 
results 
Note: 
In the table of competency - the highest level of competency acquired is specified and implies that the lower levels have been acquired already. Therefore, when 
a student is able toSH - Show how- an informed consent is obtai ned - it ispresumed that the preceding steps - the knowledge, t he analyticalskills, the skill of 
communicating have all been obtained. 
 
It may also be noted that attainment of the highest level of competency may be obtained through steps spread over several subjects or phases and not 
necessarily in the subject or the phase in which the competency has been identified.

31 
 
 
 
 
Volume III 
Competency based Undergraduate Curriculum 
in 
Surgery & Allied subjects

32 
 
 
 
 
 
 
GENERAL SURGERY (CODE:SU)

33 
Number COMPETENCY 
The student should be able to 
Predominant 
Domain 
K/S/A/C 
Level 
K/KH/S 
H/P 
Core 
(Y/N) 
Suggested Teaching 
Learning method 
Suggested 
Assessment 
method 
N
Req
mber 
uired to 
certify 
P 
GENERAL SURGERY (Topics:30, Competencies: 133) 
Topic1: Metabolic response to injury Number of competencies: (0 3) Number of competencies that require certification: (NIL) 
SU1.1 Describe Basic concepts of homeo stasis, enumerate the 
metabolic changes in injury and their mediators. 
K K H Y LGT, Bed side clinic, SGT Written/Vivavoce  
SU1.2 Describe the factors that  affect    the metabolic  responset o  i n j u r y .K K H Y LGT, Bed side clinic,SGT Written/Vivavoce  
SU1.3 Describe basic concepts of perioperative care. K K H Y LGT, Bed side clinic,SGT Written/Vivavoce  
Topic 2: Shock Number of competencies: (03) Number of competenc ies that require certification: (NIL) 
SU2.1 Describe Pathophysiology of shock, types of shock & principles of 
resuscitation including fluid replacement and monitoring. 
K K H Y LGT,SGT Written/Vivavoce  
SU2.2 Describe the clinical features of shock and its appropriate treatment. K K H Y LGT,SGT Written/Vivavoce  
SU2.3 Communicate and counsel patients and families about the treatment 
and prognosis of shock demonstrating empathy and care 
A/C SH Y DOAP Skillassessment  
Topic 3: Blood and blood components Number of competencies: (03 ) Number of competencies that require certification: (NIL) 
SU3.1 Describe  the  Indications and appropriate use of blood and blood 
products and complications of blood transfusion. 
K K H Y LGT,SGT Written/Vivavoce  
SU3.2 Observe  blo od transfusions. S S H Y SGT,DOAP Skillsassessment, 
Log book 
 
SU3.3 Counsel patients  and family/friends for blood transfusion and blood 
donation. 
A/C SH Y DOAP Skillsassessment  
Topic 4: Burns Number of competencies: (04 ) Number of competencies that require certification: (NIL) 
SU4.1 Elicit  document and present history in a case of  Burns and perform 
physical examination. Describe Pathophysiology of Burns. 
K K H Y LGT,SGT Written/Vivavoce  
SU4.2 Describe Clinical features, Diagnose type and  extent of burns 
and plan appropriate treatment. 
K K H Y LGT,SGT Written/Vivavoce

34 
SU4.3 Discuss the  Medico legal aspects in burn  injuries. K K H Y LGT,SGT Written/Vivavoce  
SU4.4 Communicate and counsel patients and families on the 
outcome and rehabilitation demonstrating empathy and care. 
A/C SH Y SGT,Roleplay, Skills 
assessment 
Vivavoce  
Topic 5: Wound healing and wound care Number of competencies: ( 04 ) Number of competencies that require certification: (NIL) 
SU5.1 Describe normal wound heal ing and  factors affecting healing. K K H Y LGT,SGT Written/Vivavoce  
SU5.2 Elicit, document and present a history in  a patient presenting  with 
wounds. 
C SH Y LGT,SGT Written/Vivavoce  
SU5.3 Differentiate the  various types of wounds,plan and observe 
management of wounds. 
K K H Y LGT,SGT Written/Vivavoce  
SU5.4 Discuss medico legal aspects of wounds K K H Y LGT,SGT Written/Vivavoce  
         Topic 6: Surgical infections            Number of compe t e n c i e s :  ( 0 2 )                          N u m b e r  o f  c o m p e t e n c i e s  that require certification: (NIL) 
SU6.1 Define and  describe the  aetiology and pathogenesis of surgical 
Infections 
K K H Y LGT,SGT Written/Vivavoce  
SU6.2 Enumerate Prophylactic and therapeutic antibiotics 
Plan appropriate management 
K KH Y LGT,SGT Written/Vivavoce  
Topic 7: Surgical Audit and Research Number of competencies: (0 2) Number of competencies that require certification: (NIL) 
SU7.1 Describe the Planning and conduct of Surgical audit K K H Y LGT,SGT Written/Vivavoce  
SU7.2 Describe the principles and steps of clinical research in General Surgery K K H Y LGT,SGT Written/Vivavoce  
Topic 8: Ethics Number of compet encies: (03) Number of competen cies that require certification: (NIL) 
SU8.1 Describe  the  principles of  Ethics as  it pertains to General  Surgery K K H Y LGT,SGT Written/Vivavoce/ 
Skill assessment 
- 
SU8.2 Demonstrate  Professionalism and empathy to the patient 
undergoing General Surgery 
A/C SH Y LGT,SGT, DOAP Written/Vivavoce/ 
Skill assessment 
 
SU8.3 Discuss Medico-legal issues in  surgical practice A/C KH Y LGT,SGT Written/Vivavoce/ 
Skill assessment 
 
Topic 9: Investigation of surgical patient Number of competenci es (03) Number of competencies that require certification: (NIL) 
SU9.1 Choose appropriate biochemical, microbiological, pathological, 
imaging investigations and interpret the investigative data in a surgical 
patient 
C KH Y LGT,SGT Written/Vivavoce

35 
SU9.2 Biological basis for early detection of cancer and multi disciplinary 
approach in management of cancer 
C KH Y LGT,SGT Written/Vivavoce  
SU9.3 Communicate  the results of surgical investigations and counsel the 
patient appropriately 
C SH Y DOAP Skillassessment  
Topic 10: Pre, intra and post- operative management. Number of competencies: (04) Number of competencies that require certification: (NIL) 
SU10.1 Describe the principles of perioperative management of common 
surgical competencies 
K K H Y LGT,SGT Written/Vivavoce  
SU10.2 Describe the  steps and obtain informed consent in a simulated 
environment 
S/A/C SH Y DOAP Skillassessment/Log 
book 
 
SU10.3 Observe common surgical competencies and assist in minor surgical 
competencies; Observe emergency lifesaving surgical competencies. 
S K H Y DOAPs Logbook  
SU10.4 Perform basic surgical  Skills such as First aid including  suturing and 
minor surgical competencies in simulated environment 
S P Y DOAP Skillassessment  
Topic 11: Anaesthesia and pain management Number of competencie s: (06) Number of competencies that require certification: (NIL) 
SU11.1 Describe  principles of  Preoperative assessment. K K H Y LGT,SGT Written/Vivavoce  
SU11.2 Enumerate the principles of general, regional, and local Anaesthesia. K K H Y LGT,SGT Written/Vivavoce  
SU11.3 Demonstrate maintenance of an  airway in a mannequin or equivalent S S H Y DOAP Skillassessment  
SU11.4 Enumerate the indications and principles of  daycare General Surgery K K H Y LGT,SGT Written/Vivavoce  
SU11.5 Describe principles of providing post-operative pain  reliefand 
management of chronic pain. 
K K H Y LGT,SGT Written/Vivavoce  
SU11.6 Describe Principles of safe General Surgery K K H Y LGT,SGT Written/Vivavoce  
Topic 12: Nutrition and fluid therapy Number of competencies: ( 03 ) Number of competencies that require certification: (NIL) 
SU12.1 Enumeratethecausesandconsequencesofmalnutritioninthe surgical 
patient 
K K H Y LGT,SGT, Bedside clinic Written/Vivavoce  
SU12.2 Describeanddiscussthemethodsofestimationandreplacementof the 
fluid and electrolyte requirements in the surgical patient 
K K H Y LGT,SGT, Bedside clinic Written/Vivavoce  
SU12.3 Discuss the nutritional requirements of surgical patients, the 
methodsofprovidingnutritionalsupportandtheircomplications 
K K H Y LGT,SGT, Bedside clinic Written/Vivavoce

36 
Topic 13: Transplantation Number of competencies: (04) Number o f competencies that require certification: (NIL) 
SU13.1 Describe the immunological basis of organ transplantation K K H Y LGT,SGT Written/Vivavoce  
SU13.2 Discuss the Principles of immunosuppressive therapy. 
Enumerate Indications, describe surgical principles, 
management of organ Transplantation 
K K H Y LGT,SGT Written/Vivavoce  
SU13.3 Discuss the legal and eth ical issues concerning organ donation K K H Y LGT,SGT Written/Vivavoce  
SU13.4 Counsel patients and relatives on organ donation  in a simulated 
environment 
S S H Y DOAP Skillassessment  
Topic 14: Basic Surgical Skills Number of competencies: (04)  Number of competencies that require certification: (NIL) 
SU14.1 Describe Aseptic techniques, sterilization and disinfection. K K H Y LGT,SGT Written/Vivavoce  
SU14.2 Describe  Surgical approaches,incisions and  the use of appropriate 
instruments in Surgery in general. 
K K H Y LGT,SGT Written/Vivavoce  
SU14.3 Describe the materials and methods used for surgical wound closure 
and anastomosis (sutures, knots and needles) 
K K H Y LGT,SGT Written/Vivavoce  
SU14.4 Demonstrate the techniques of asepsis and suturing in a simulated 
environment 
S S H Y DOAP Skillassessment/Log 
book 
 
Topic 15: Biohazard disposal Numb er of competencies: (01) Number of competencies that require certification: (NIL) 
SU15.1 Describe  classification of hospital waste and appropriate methods of 
disposal. 
K K H Y LGT,SGT Written/Vivavoce  
Topic 16: Minimally invasive General Surgery Number of competen cies: (01) Number of competencies that require certification: (NIL) 
SU16.1 Minimally invasive General Surgery: Describe indications advantages 
and disadvantages of Minimally invasive General Surgery 
K K Y LGT, Demonstration, Bedside 
clinic, Discussion 
Theory/ Practical 
/ 
Orals/Written/Vi 
va voce 
 
Topic 17: Trauma Number of competencies: (10) Number of compete ncies that require certification: (NIL) 
SU17.1 Describe the Principles of FIRSTAID S K H Y LGT,SGT Written/Vivavoce  
SU17.2 Demonstrate the steps in Basic Life Support. Transport of injured 
patient in a simulated environment 
S S H Y DOAP Skill assessment

37 
SU17.3 Describe the Principles in management of mass casualties K KH Y LGT,SGT Written/Vivavoce  
SU17.4 Describe Pathophysiology, mechanism of head injuries K KH Y LGT,SGT Written/Vivavoce  
SU17.5 Describe clinical features for neurological assessment and GCS in 
head injuries 
K KH Y LGT,SGT Written/Vivavoce  
SU17.6 Chose appropriate investigations and discuss the principles of 
management of head injuries 
K KH Y LGT,SGT Written/Vivavoce  
SU17.7 Describe the clinical features of soft tissue injuries. Chose 
appropriate investigations and discuss the principles of 
management. 
K KH Y LGT,SGT Written/Vivavoce  
SU17.8 Describe the pathophysiology of chest injuries. K KH Y LGT,SGT Written/Vivavoce  
SU17.9 Describe the clinical features and principles of management of chest 
injuries. 
K KH Y LGT,SGT Written/Vivavoce  
SU17.10 Demonstrate Airway maintenance. Recognizeand manage tension 
pneumothorax, hemothorax and flailchest in simulated environment. 
S SH Y DOAP Skill assessment/Log 
book 
 
Topic 18: Skin and subcutaneous tissue Number of competencies: (03) Number of competencies that require certification: (NIL) 
SU18.1 Describe the pathogenesis, clinical features and management of 
various cutaneous and subcutaneous infections. 
K KH Y LGT,Small group Discussion Written/Vivavoce  
SU18.2 Classify skin tumors 
Differentiate different skin tumors and discuss their management. 
K KH Y LGT,SGT Written/Vivavoce/ 
Skill assessment 
 
SU18.3 Describe and demonstrate the clinical examination of surgical 
patient including swelling and order relevant investigation for 
diagnosis. Describe and discuss appropriate treatment plan. 
S SH Y Bedside clinic,SGT, DOAP Skillassessment  
Topic 19: Developmental anomalies of face, mouth and jaws Numbe r of competencies: (02) Number of competencies that require certification: (NIL) 
SU19.1 Describe the etiology and classification of cleftlip and palate K K H Y LGT,Small group Discussion Written/Vivavoce  
SU19.2 Describe the Principles of reconstruction of cleftlip and palate K K H Y LGT,Small group Discussion Written/Vivavoce  
Topic 20: Oropharyngeal cancer Number of competencies: (02) Num ber of competencies that require certification: (NIL) 
SU20.1 Describe etiopathogenesis of oral cancer symptoms and signs of 
oropharyngeal cancer. 
K K H Y LGT,SGT Written/Vivavoce

38 
SU20.2 Enumerate the appropriate investigations and discuss the 
Principles of treatment. 
K K Y LGT,SGT Written/Vivavoce  
Topic 21: Disorders of salivary glands Number of competencies: (02) Number of competencies that require certification: (NIL) 
SU21.1 Describe surgical anatomy of the salivary glands, pathology, and 
clinical presentation of disorders of salivary glands 
K K H Y LGT,SGT Written/Vivavoce  
SU21.2 Enumerate the appropriate investigations and describe the Principles 
of treatment of disorders of salivary glands 
K K H Y LGT,SGT Written/Vivavoce  
Topic 22: Endocrine General Surgery: Thyroid and parathyroid Number of competencies: (06) Number of competencies that require certification: (NIL) 
SU22.1 Describe the applied anatomy and physiology of thyroid K K H Y LGT,SGT Written/Vivavoce  
SU22.2 Describe the etiopathogenesis of thyroidal swellings K K H Y LGT,SGT Written/Vivavoce  
SU22.3 Demonstrate and document the correct clinical examination of thyroid 
swellings and discuss the differential diagnosis and their 
Management 
S S H Y Bedsideclinic Skillassessment  
SU22.4 Describe the clinical features, classification and principles of 
management of thyroid cancer 
K K H Y LGT,SGT Written/Vivavoce  
SU22.5 Describe the applied anatomy of parathyroid K K H Y LGT,SGT Written/Vivavoce  
SU22.6 Describe and discuss the clinical features of hypo - and 
Hyperparathyroidism and the principles of their management 
K K H Y LGT,SGT Written/Vivavoce  
Topic 23: Adrenal glands Number of competencies: (03) Number of  competencies that require certification: (NIL) 
SU23.1 Describe the applied anatomy of adrenal glands K K H Y LGT,SGT Written/Vivavoce  
SU23.2 Describe the etiology, clinical features and principles of management 
of disorders of adrenal gland 
K K H Y LGT,SGT Written/Vivavoce  
SU23.3 Describe the clinical features, principles of investigation and 
management of Adrenal tumors 
K K H Y LGT,SGT, Demonstration Written/Vivavoce  
SU24.1 Describe the clinical features, principles of investigation, prognosis 
and management of pancreatitis. 
K K H Y LGT,SGT Written/Vivavoce  
SU24.2 Describe the clinical features, principles of investigation, prognosis 
and management of pancreatic endocrine tumours 
K K H Y LGT,SGT, Demonstration Written/Vivavoce

39 
SU24.3 Describe the principles of investigation and management of Pancreatic
disorders including pancreatitis and endocrine tumors. 
K K H Y LGT,SGT, Demonstration W r i t t e n / V i v a v o c e /  
Skill assessment 
 
                                                       Topic 25: Breast                                  Number of competencie s :  ( 0 5 )                           N u m b e r  o f  c o m p e t e n c i e s  t h a t  r equire certification: (NIL) 
SU25.1 Describe applied anatomy and appropriate investigations for 
breast disease 
K K H Y LGT,SGT Written/Vivavoce/ 
Skill assessment 
 
SU25.2 Describe the etiopathogenesis, clinical features and principles of 
management of benign breast disease including infections of the 
Breast 
K K H Y LGT,SGT Written/Vivavoce/ 
Skillassessment 
 
SU25.3 Describe the etiopathogenesis, clinical features, Investigations and 
principles of treatment of benign and malignant tumours of breast. 
K K H Y LGT,SGT, Demonstration W r i t t e n / V i v a v o c e /  
Skill assessment 
 
SU25.4 Counsel the patient and obtain informed consent for treatment of 
malignant conditions of the breast 
A/C SH Y DOAP Skillassessment  
SU25.5 Demonstrate the correct technique to palpate the breast for 
breast swelling in a mannequin or equivalent 
S S H Y DOAP Skillassessment  
Topic 26: Cardio-thoracic General Surgery- Chest - Heart and Lungs Number of competencies: (04) Number of competencies that re quire certification: (NIL) 
SU26.1 Outline the role of surgery in the management of coronary heart 
disease, valvular heart diseases and congenital heart diseases 
K K Y LGT,SGT Written/Vivavoce  
SU26.3 Describe the clinical features of mediastinal diseases and the 
principles of management 
K K Y LGT,SGT Written/Vivavoce  
SU26.4 Describe the etiology, pathogenesis, clinical features of tumors of 
lung and the principles of management 
K K Y LGT,SGT Written/Vivavoce  
SU27.1 Describe the etiopathogenesis, clinical features, investigations and 
principles of treatment of occlusive arterial disease. 
K K H Y LGT,SGT Written/Vivavoce/ 
Skillassessment 
 
SU27.2 Demonstrate the correct examination of the vascular system and 
enumerate and describe the investigation of vascular disease 
S S H Y DOAP Skillassessment  
SU27.3 Describe clinical features, investigations and principles of 
management of vasospastic disorders 
K K H Y LGT,SGT Written/Vivavoce  
SU27.4 Describe the types of gangrene and principles of amputation K K H Y LGT,SGT Written/Vivavoce/ 
Skill assessment 
 
SU27.5 Describe the applied anatomy of venous system of lower limb K K Y LGT,SGT Written/Vivavoce

40 
SU27.6 Describe pathophysiology, clinical features, Investigations and 
principles of management of DVT and Varicose veins 
K K H Y LGT,SGT, Demonstration W r i t t e n / V i v a v o c e /  
Skill assessment 
 
SU27.7 Describe pathophysiology, clinical features, investigations and 
principles of management of Lymphedema, lymphangitis and 
Lymphomas 
K K H Y LGT,SGT Written/Vivavoce/ 
Skill assessment 
 
SU27.8 Demonstrate the correct e xamination of the lymphatic system S S H Y DOAP, Bedside clinic Skillassessment  
Topic 28: Abdomen Number of competencies: (18) Number of compet encies that require certification: (NIL) 
SU28.1 Describe pathophysiology, clinical features, Investigations and 
principles of management of Hernias 
K K H Y LGT,SGT Written/Vivavoce/ 
Skill assessment 
 
SU28.2 Demonstrate the correct technique to examine the patient with 
hernia and identify different types of hernias. 
S S H Y DOAP, Bedside clinic Skillassessment  
SU28.3 Describe causes, clinical features, complications and principles of 
management of peritonitis 
K K Y LGT,SGT,
Bedsideclinic 
Written/Vivavoce  
SU28.4 Describe pathophysiology, clinical features, investigations and 
principles of management of Intra-abdominal abscess, mesenteric 
cyst, and retroperitoneal tumors 
K K Y LGT,SGT, Demonstration Written/Vivavoce  
SU28.5 Describe the applied Anatomy and physiology of esophagus K K Y LGT,SGT, Demonstration Written/Vivavoce  
SU28.6 Describe the clinical features, investigations and principles of 
management of benign and malignant disorders of esophagus 
K K Y LGT,SGT, Demonstration Written/Vivavoce  
SU28.7 Describe the applied anatomy and physiology of stomach K K H Y LGT,SGT Written/Vivavoce  
SU28.8 Describe and discuss the aetiology, the clinical features, investigations 
and principles of management of congenital 
hypertrophicpyloricstenosis, Peptic ulcer disease, Carcinoma stomach
K K H Y LGT,SGT Written/Vivavoce/ 
Skill assessment 
 
SU28.9 Demonstrate the correct technique of examination of a patient with 
disorders of the stomach 
S S H Y DOAP, Bedside clinic Skillassessment  
SU28.10 Describe the applied anatomy of liver. Describe the clinical features, 
Investigations and principles of management of liver abscess, hydatid 
disease, injuries and tumors of the liver 
K K H Y LGT,SGT, Demonstration Written/Vivavoce  
SU28.11 Describe the applied anatomy of spleen. Describe the clinical 
features, investigations and principles of management of splenic 
injuries. Describe the post-splenectomy sepsis - prophylaxis 
K K H Y LGT,SGT, Demonstration Written/Vivavoce

41 
SU28.12 Describe the applied anatomyofbiliary system. Describe the 
clinical features, investigations and principles of management of 
diseases of biliary system 
K K H Y LGT,SGT, Demonstration Written/Vivavoce  
SU28.13 Describe the applied anatomy of small and large intestine K K H Y LGT,SGT, Demonstration Written/Vivavoce  
SU28.14 Describe the clinical features, investigations and principles of 
management of disorders of small and large intestine including 
neonatal obstruction and Short gut syndrome 
K K H Y LGT,SGT, Demonstration Written/Vivavoce  
SU28.15 Describe the clinical features, investigations and principles of 
management of diseases of Appendix including appendicitis and its 
complications. 
K K H Y LGT,SGT, Demonstration Written/Vivavoce/ 
Skill assessment 
 
SU28.16 Describe applied anatomy including congenital anomalies of the rectum
and anal canal 
K K H Y LGT,SGT, Demonstration W r i t t e n / V i v a v o c e /  
Skill assessment 
 
SU28.17 Describe the clinical features, investigations and principles of 
management of common anorectal diseases 
K K H Y LGT,SGT, Demonstration Written/Vivavoce/ 
Skill assessment 
 
SU28.18 Describe and demonstrate clinical examination of abdomen. Order 
relevant investigations.  Describe and discuss appropriate treatment 
plan 
S S H Y Bedsideclinic,DOAP, SGT Skillassessment  
Topic 29: Urinary System Number of competencies: (11) Number of  competencies that require certification: (NIL) 
SU29.1 Describe the causes, investigations and principles of management of 
Hematuria 
K K H Y LGT,SGT Written/Vivavoce  
SU29.2 Describe the clinical features, investigations and principles of 
management of congenital anomalies of genito urinary system 
K K H Y LGT,SGT Written/Vivavoce  
SU29.3 Describe the Clinical features, Investigations and principles of 
management of urinary tract infections 
K K H Y LGT,SGT Written/Vivavoce  
SU29.4 Describe the clinical features, investigations and principles of 
management of hydronephrosis 
K K H Y LGT,SGT Written/Vivavoce  
SU29.5 Describe the clinical features, investigations and 
principles of  management of renal calculi 
K K H Y LGT,SGT Written/Vivavoce  
SU29.6 Describe the clinical features, investigations and principles of 
management of renal tumours 
K K H Y LGT,SGT Written/Vivavoce

42 
SU29.7 Describe the principles of management of acute and chronic retention 
of urine 
K K H Y LGT,SGT Written/Vivavoce  
SU29.8 Describe the clinical features, investigations and principles of 
management of bladder cancer 
K K H Y LGT,SGT Written/Vivavoce  
SU29.9 Describe the clinical features, investigations and principles of 
management of disorders of prostate 
K K H Y LGT,SGT Written/Vivavoce/ 
Skill assessment 
 
SU29.10 Demonstrate a digital rectal examination of the prostateina 
mannequin or equivalent 
S S H Y DOAP Skillassessment  
SU29.11 Describe clinical features, investigations and management of 
urethral strictures 
K K H Y LGT,SGT, Demonstration Written/Vivavoce/ 
Skill assessment 
 
                                                      Topic 30: Penis, Testis and scrotum                        Number of com p e t e n c i e s :  ( 0 6 )                 N u m b e r  o f  c o m p e t e n c i e s  t h a t  r e q uire certification: (NIL) 
SU30.1 Describe the clinical features, investigations and principles of 
management of phimosis, paraphimosis and carcinoma penis. 
K K H Y LGT,SGT, Demonstration Written/Vivavoce/ 
Skill assessment 
 
SU30.2 Describe the applied anatomy clinical features, investigations and 
principles of management of undescended testis. 
K K H Y LGT,SGT, Demonstration Written/Vivavoce/ 
Skill assessment 
 
SU30.3 Describe the applied anatomy clinical features, investigations and 
principles of management of epidydimo-orchitis 
K K H Y LGT,SGT, Demonstration Written/Vivavoce/ 
Skill assessment 
 
SU30.4 Describe the applied anatomy clinical features, investigations and 
principles of management of varicocele 
K K H Y LGT,SGT, Demonstration Written/Vivavoce/ 
Skill assessment 
 
SU30.5 Describe the applied anatomy, clinical features, investigations and 
principles of management of Hydrocele 
K K H Y LGT,SGT, Demonstration Written/Vivavoce/ 
Skill assessment 
 
SU30.6 Describe classification, clinical features, investigations and principles of 
management of tumours of testis 
K K H Y LGT,SGT, Demonstration Written/Vivavoce/ 
Skill assessment

43 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
OPHTHALMOLOGY(CODE:OP)

44 
Number COMPETENCY 
The student should be able to 
Predominant 
Domain 
K/S/A/C 
Level 
K/KH/S 
H/P 
Core 
(Y/N) 
Suggested Teaching 
Learning method 
Suggested 
Assessment 
method 
Number 
Required to 
certify 
P 
OPHTHALMOLOGY( Topics:10, Competencies: 60) 
Topic 1: Visual Acuity Assessment Number of Competencies: (05) Number of competencies that require certification : (NIL) 
OP1.1 Describe the physiology of vision, optics of eye and anatomy of  visual
pathway. 
K K H Y LGT,SGT Written/Viva voce  
OP1.2 Define,classify and  describe the types and methods of correcting 
refractive errors. 
K K H Y LGT,SGT Written/Viva voce  
OP1.3 Demonstrate  the  steps in performing the  visualacuity assessment 
for  distance vision  ,near vision, colour  vision,the  pinhole test and 
the menace and blink reflexes 
S S H Y DOAP, LGT Skillassessment 
/ Logbook 
 
OP1.4 Enumerate the indications and describe  the principlesofrefractive 
surgery 
K K H Y LGT,SGT Written/Viva voce  
OP1.5 Define Amblyopia, enumerate the types of Amblyopia and describe 
the prevention and treatment of refractive Amblyopia. 
K K H Y LGT,SGT Written/Viva voce  
Topic 2: Lids and Adnexa, Orbit Number of Competencies: (08) Number of competencies that require certification: (NIL) 
OP2.1 Describe and discuss the aetiology and clinical features, investigations
and treatment of HordeolumexternumHordeoluminternum, 
Ectropion, Entropion, Lagophthalmos, Blepharitis, Preseptal cellulitis. 
K K H Y LGT,SGT Written/Viva voce  
OP2.2 Demonstrate under supervision, the clinical procedure performed- 
Bell’s phenomenon, Ptosis evaluation, Massage technique in 
Congenital Dacryocystitis, Epilation. 
S S H Y DOAP Skillassessment  
OP2.3 Describe the aetiology, clinical presentation, complications and 
management of Thyroid eye disease 
K K H Y DOAP, LGT Skillassessment  
OP2.4 Describe the aetiology,  clinical presentation. Discuss the  
complications and management of orbital cellulitis 
K K H Y LGT,SGT Written/Viva voce  
OP2.5 Describetheclinical features  onocular examination and 
management of a patient with cavernous sinus thrombosis 
K K H Y LGT,SGT Written/Viva voce  
OP2.6 Enumerate the causes and describe the differentiating features, and 
clinical features and management of proptosis 
K K H Y LGT,SGT Written/Viva voce

45 
Number COMPETENCY 
The student should be able to 
Predominant 
Domain 
K/S/A/C 
Level 
K/KH/S 
H/P 
Core 
(Y/N) 
Suggested Teaching 
Learning method 
Suggested 
Assessment 
method 
Number 
Required to 
certify 
P 
OP2.7 Classification and clinical prese ntation of various types of or bital 
tumours 
K K H Y LGT,SGT Written/Viva voce  
OP2.8 Describe the investigations, management, indications for referral of 
Orbital tumours. 
K K H Y LGT,SGT Written/Viva voce  
Topic 3: Conjunctiva Number of Competencies (07 ) Number of com petencies that require certification: (NIL) 
OP3.1 Demonstrate history taking in a patient with ‘Red eye’, Enumerate the 
causes for red eye. 
S S H Y DOAP SkillAssessment  
OP3.2 Describe the etiopathogenesis, clinical features and treatment of 
acute bacterial and viral conjunctivitis. 
K K H Y LGT, SGT SkillAssessment  
OP3.3 Enumerate the causes for chronic conjunctivitis. Describe the aetiology, 
pathophysiology, ocular features, differential diagnosis, 
complicationsand management of trachoma. 
K K H Y LGT,SGT Written/Viva voce  
OP3.4 Enumerate the causes for allergic conjunctivitis. Describe the aetiology 
pathophysiology, ocular features, complications and management of 
vernal catarrh. 
K K H Y LGT,SGT Written/Viva voce  
OP3.5 Describe the aetiology, pathophysiology, ocular features, differential 
diagnosis, complicationsand management of pterygium 
K K H Y LGT,SGT Written/Viva voce  
OP3.6 Demonstrate correct technique of removal of foreign body from the 
eye in a simulated environment 
S S H y DOAP Session Skill assessment  
OP3.7 Demonstrate under supervision the technique of instillation of eye 
drops and counselling of patients you put on topical ocular 
medications 
S S H Y DOAP Skill assessment  
                                                                                         Topic 4: Corneas Number of Competenci es: (10)                   Number of competencies that require certification: (NIL) 
OP4.1 Describe the applied anatomy and physiology of cornea and the 
factors maintaining corneal transparency 
K K H Y LGT,SGT Written/Viva voce  
OP4.2 Enumerate various congenita l anomalies and inflammations ofcornea. K K H Y LGT,SGT Written/Viva voce  
OP4.3 Enumerate the differential diagnosis of corneal ulcer (infective 
Keratitis) and describe the aetiopathogenesis, clinical features and 
management of each type of infective keratitis. 
K K H Y LGT,SGT Written/Viva voce  
OP4.4 Identify corneal opacity and different grades of corneal opacity.
Enumerate various management modalities of corneal opacity. 
K K H Y LGT,SGT Written/Viva voce

46 
Number COMPETENCY 
The student should be able to 
Predominant 
Domain 
K/S/A/C 
Level 
K/KH/S 
H/P 
Core 
(Y/N) 
Suggested Teaching 
Learning method 
Suggested 
Assessment 
method 
Number 
Required to 
certify 
P 
        
OP4.5 Describe tear film. Enumerate the causes of dry eyes and describe the 
clinical features and management of dry eyes 
K K H Y LGT,SGT Written/Viva voce  
OP4.6 Define blindness. Enumerate the causes of corneal blindness K K H Y LGT,SGT Written/Viva voce  
OP4.7 Enumeratethetypes and th e indications of Keratoplasty. K K H Y LGT,SGT Written/Viva voce  
OP4.8 Describe the importance of eye donation and eye banking and 
enumerate the various protocols involved in eye donation and eye 
banking. 
S S H Y DOAP Skillassessment  
OP4.9 Identify corneal foreign body and demonstrate techniques of removal 
of corneal foreign body in simulated environment. 
K K H Y LGT,SGT Written/Viva voce  
OP4.10 Counselpatientsandfamily in a simulated environment about eye 
donation and teach them how to preserve the eye in the deceased till 
enucleation is done. 
A/C SH Y DOAP Skillassessment  
                                                                    T o p i c  5 :  S c l e r a         N u m b e r  o f  c o m p e t e n c i e s :  ( 0 2 )            Number of competencies that require certification : (NIL) 
OP5.1 Describe the etiopathogenesis, classification, clinical features, 
complications and management of episcleritis. 
K K H Y LGT,SGT Written/Viva voce  
OP5.2 Enumerate the systemic conditions associated with episcleritis and 
scleritis, indications for their referral. 
K K H Y LGT,SGT Written/Viva voce  
Topic 6: Iris and Anterior chamber Number of Competencies (4) N umber of competencies that require certification: (NIL) 
OP6.1 Define Uveitis. Describe the anatomical classification of Uveit is. 
Describe the clinical features of Iridocyclitis. Distinguish granulomatous 
iridocyclitis from non-granulomatousiridocyclitis. 
K K H Y LGT,SGT Written/Viva voce  
OP6.2 Describe the complication of iridocyclitis, investigations and treatment 
of iridocyclitis. 
K K H Y LGT,SGT Written/Viva voce  
OP6.3 Distinguish Hyphema from Hypopyon clinically and enumerate their 
causes. 
K K H Y LGT,SGT Written/Viva voce  
OP6.4 Enumerate systemic conditions associated with Uveitis. Counsel the 
patients with uveitis in a simulated environment 
K, A/C KH/SH Y LGT,SGT, DOAP Written/Viva voce  
Topic 7: Glaucoma Number of Competencies: (05) Number of compet encies that require certification: (NIL) 
OP7.1 Describe the etiopathogenesis , clinical features and management of 
congenital glaucoma. 
K K H Y LGT,SGT Written/Viva voce

47 
Number COMPETENCY 
The student should be able to 
Predominant 
Domain 
K/S/A/C 
Level 
K/KH/S 
H/P 
Core 
(Y/N) 
Suggested Teaching 
Learning method 
Suggested 
Assessment 
method 
Number 
Required to 
certify 
P 
OP7.2 Describe the etiopathogenesis , clinical features and management of 
primary open angle glaucoma. 
K K H Y LGT,SGT Written/Viva voce  
OP7.3 Describe the etiopathogenesis , clinical features and management of 
primary angle closure glaucoma. 
S S H Y DOAP Skillassessment  
OP7.4 Enumerate the causes of secondary glaucoma. K K H Y LGT,SGT Written/Viva voce  
OP7.5 Counsel the patient with glaucoma regarding the treatment modalities 
complications with treatment and prognosis in a simulated 
environment. 
A/c SH Y DOAP Skillassessment  
Topic 8: Lens Number of Competencies (06) Number of competencie s that require certification : (NIL) 
OP8.1 Describe the surgical anatomy of lens K K H Y LGT,SGT Written/Viva voce  
OP8.2 Describe the etiopathogenesis, etiological classification, stages of 
maturation and complications of cataract. 
K K H Y LGT,SGT Written/Viva voce  
OP8.3 Demonstrate the pre operative evaluation and counselling of a patient
posted for cataract surgery. 
S S H Y DOAP Skill assessment  
OP8.4 Enumerate the different types of cataract surgery. 
Enumerate the different ocular anaesthesia techniques. 
Describe the steps of extra capsular cataract surgery, enumerate the 
intra operative and post operative complications of ECCE, discuss the 
post operative treatment. 
S K H Y LGT,SGT Written/Viva voce  
OP8.5 Elicit history and clinical signs in a case of aphakia. Discuss  the 
management of aphakia 
K S H Y LGT,SGT, DOAP Skill Assessment/ 
Logbook 
documentation 
Viva Voce 
 
OP8.6 Participation of IMG in the team for cataract surgery S S H Y DOAP Skill assessment  
                                                                                                             Topic 9: Retina&opticNerve  NumberofCompetencies( 05) Numberofcompetenciesthatreq uirecertification:(NIL) 
OP9.1 Demonstrate the technique of direct and indirect ophthalmoscopy. 
Describe the fundoscopic features of normal retina. 
S S H Y LGT,SGT,DOAP Written/Viva voce, 
Skill assessment 
 
OP9.2 Describe the etiopathogenesis, c linical features, management an d 
screening protocol for Diabetic Retinopathy. 
K K H Y LGT,SGT Written/Viva voce

48 
Number COMPETENCY 
The student should be able to 
Predominant 
Domain 
K/S/A/C 
Level 
K/KH/S 
H/P 
Core 
(Y/N) 
Suggested Teaching 
Learning method 
Suggested 
Assessment 
method 
Number 
Required to 
certify 
P 
OP9.3 Discuss the etiopathogenesis, clinical features and management of 
vascular occlusions of retina. 
K K H Y LGT,SGT Written/ Viva Voce  
OP9.4 Discuss the etiopathogenesis, clinical features and management of 
Hypertensive retinopathy, retinopathy of prematurity, Eales disease , 
retinal detachment, central serous retinopathy, cystoid macular 
edema, age related macular degeneration, retinitis pigmentosa and 
Retinoblastoma. 
K K H Y LGT,SGT Written/Viva voce  
OP9.5 Describe and discuss the correlative  anatomy,aetiology,clinical 
manifestations, diagnostic tests, imaging and treatment of diseases of 
the optic nerve and visual pathway 
K K H Y LGT,SGT Written/Viva voce  
                                                                                Topic 10:Miscellaneous                                      NumberofCompetencies(07)          Numberofcompetenciesthatrequirecertification:(01) 
OP10.1 Demonstrate the correct technique to examine extraocular movements
(Uniocular & Binocular) 
S P Y DOAP SkillAssessment 5 
OP10.2 Classify, enumerate the types, methods of diagnosis and indications for
referral in a patient with heterotropia/ strabismus 
K K H Y LGT,SGT Written/Vivavoce/ 
skill assessment 
 
OP10.3 Describe the role of refractive error correction in a patient with 
headache and enumerate the indications for referral 
K K H Y LGT,SGT Written/Viva voce  
OP10.4 Describe the classifications, causes, ocular manifestations and 
management of vitamin A deficiency. Indications for referral. 
K K H Y LGT,SGT Written/Viva voce  
OP10.5 Enumerate the indications for enucleation, evisceration and 
exenteration. 
K K H Y LGT,SGT Written/Viva voce  
OP10.6 Classify ocular injuries, describe their primary management. 
Indications for referral. 
K K H Y LGT,SGT Written/Viva voce  
OP10.7 Enumerate the causes of Blindness and Vision impairment. Discuss 
National Program for Control of Blindness (NPCB, including vision 
2020) 
K K H Y LGT,SGT Written/Viva voce

49 
 
 
 
 
 
 
OTORHINOLARYNGOLOGY	(ENT)	(CODE:	EN)

50 
Number COMPETENCY 
The student should be able to 
Predominant 
Domain 
K/S/A/C 
Level 
K/KH/S 
H/P 
Core 
(Y/N) 
Suggested Teaching 
Learning method 
Suggested 
Assessment 
method 
Number 
Required to 
certify 
P 
OTORHINOLARYNGOLOGY (ENT)(Topics:4, Competencies: 63) 
Topic 1: Anatomy and Physiology of ear, nose, throat, head & neck  Number of competencies:(02) Number of competencies that req uire certification:(Nil) 
EN1.1 Describe the Anatomy & physiology of ear, nose, throat, h ead & neck K KH Y LGT, SGT. Written/ Viva voce  
EN1.2 Describe the pathophysiology of common diseases in ENT like Chronic 
Otitis Media,,Otosclerosis, Adeno tonsillitis ,Nasal polyposis . 
K KH Y LGT, SGT. Written/ Viva voce  
                                                     Topic 2: Clinical Skills                                                                   Number of competencies: (12)                   Number of competencies that require certification:(5) 
EN2.1 Elicit document and present an appropriate history in a patient 
presenting with an ENT complaint 
K/S/A/C SH Y LGT, SGT, Demonstration Skill assessment  
EN2.2 Demonstrate the correct use  of conventional methods including head 
lamp in the examination of ear, nose and throat, the correct technique 
of examination of the nose & paranasal sinuses including the use of 
nasal speculum, examination of the throat including the use of a 
tongue depressor, examination of neck including elicitation of 
laryngeal crepitus 
S SH Y DOAP Skill assessment/ 
OSCE 
3 
EN2.3 Demonstrate the correct technique of examination of the e ar including 
Otoscopy and demonstrate the correct technique of performance and 
interpretation of tuning fork tests . 
K/S/A SH Y DOAP, Bedside clinic Skill assessment/ 
OSCE 
3 
	
EN 2.4 Describe the correct technique to perform and interpret pure tone 
audiogram & impedance audiogram 
	
K/S 
	
SH 
	
Y 
	
Clinical demonstration. 
	
Skill assessment 
3 
	
EN 2.5 
Demonstrate the correct technique of otoscopy , to hold visualize and 
assess the mobility of the tympanic membrane , interpret and 
diagrammatically represent the findings. 
	
K/S/A 
	
SH 
	
Y 
	
Clinical, Demonstration Written/ Viva voce/ 
Skill assessment 
3 
	
EN 2.6 Choose correctly and interpret radiological, microbiological & 
histological investigations relevant to the ENT disorders 
	
K/S 
	
SH 
	
Y LGT, SGT, 
Demonstration. 
Written/ Viva voce/ 
Skill assessment 
 
	
	
EN 2.7 
Identify and describe the use of common instruments used in ENT 
surgery. 
Nose: FESS, Septoplasty, Nasal Bone Reduction 
Ear Tympanoplasty, mastoidectomy, Myringotomy 
Throat: Adenotonsillectomy, Foreign Body Removal from Airway and 
Food passage, Tracheostomy 
	
	
K 
	
	
SH 
	
	
Y 
	
	
Demonstration, Bedside 
clinic . 
	
	
Skill assessment

51 
Number COMPETENCY 
The student should be able to 
Predominant 
Domain 
K/S/A/C 
Level 
K/KH/S 
H/P 
Core 
(Y/N) 
Suggested Teaching 
Learning method 
Suggested 
Assessment 
method 
Number 
Required to 
certify 
P 
EN 2.8 Enumerate suspect high-risk patients and risk factors as sociated with 
and identify by clinical examination malignant & pre- malignant Ent 
diseases 
K/S SH Y LGT, SGT, Demonstration Written/ Viva voce/ 
Skill assessment 
 
EN 2.9 Counsel and administer informed consent to patients and their 
families in a simulated environment for Ear: Tympanoplasty, 
mastoidectomy, Myringotomy Nose: FESS, Septoplasty, Nasal Bone 
Reduction Throat: Adenotonsillectomy, Foreign Body Removal from 
Airway and Food passage, Tracheostomy. 
S/A/C SH Y DOAP, Bedside clinic Skill assessment  
EN 2.10 Identify, resuscitate and manage ENT emergencies in a s imulated 
environment (including tracheostomy, anterior nasal packing, removal 
of foreign bodies in ear, nose, throat, upper respiratory tract and food 
passages). 
K/S/A SH Y DOAP, Bedside clinic Skill assessment 3 
EN 2.11 Demonstrate the correct technique to instill topical medications into 
the ear, nose and throat in a simulated environment. 
K/S SH Y DOAP, Bedside clinic Skill assessment.  
EN 2.12 Describe the national pr ograms for prevention of deafness, cancer, 
noise & environmental pollution and participate actively in deafness 
week and world hearing day 
K KH Y LGT, SGT Written/ Viva voce  
                                  Topic 3: Diagnostic and Therapeutic competencies in ENT                                                   Number of competencies:(01)    Number of competencies that require certification:(Nil) 
EN3.1 Observe and describe the indications for and steps involved in the 
performance of Oto-microscopic examination. 
S KH N LGT, SGT, Demonstration Written/ Viva voce  
EN3.2 Observe and describe the indications for and steps involved in the 
performance of Diagnostic Nasal Endoscopy. 
S KH N LGT, SGT, Demonstration Written/ Viva voce  
EN3.3 Observe and describe the indications for and steps involved in the 
performance of Rigid/Flexible Laryngoscopy 
K/S KH N LGT, SGT, Demonstration Written/ Viva voce  
 
                                    Topic 4: Management of Diseases of Ear, nose and throat                                        Number of competencies:(46)    Number of procedures that require certification:(01) 
EN 4.1 Elicit document and present a correct history, demonstrate and 
describe the clinical features, choose the correct investigations and 
describe the principles of management of Otalgia. 
	
K/S 
	
SH 
	
Y  LGT, SGT,DOAP, Bedside 
clinic 
Written/ Viva voce/ 
Skill assessment

52 
EN 4.2 Elicit document and present a correct history, demonstrate and 
describe the clinical features, choose the correct investigations and 
describe the principles of management of diseases of the external Ear. 
	
K/S 
	
SH 
	
Y 
	
LGT, SGT,DOAP, Bedside 
clinic 
	
Written/ Viva voce/ 
Skill assessment 
 
Number COMPETENCY 
The student should be able to 
Predominant 
Domain 
K/S/A/C 
Level 
K/KH/S 
H/P 
Core 
(Y/N) 
Suggested Teaching 
Learning method 
Suggested 
Assessment 
method 
Number 
Required to 
certify 
P 
EN 4.3 Elicit document and present a correct history, describe the clinical 
features, choose the correct investigations and describe the principles 
of management of ASOM 
	
K/S 
	
SH 
	
Y 
	
LGT, SGT 
	
Written/ Viva voce 
 
EN 4.4 Elicit document and present a correct history, describe the clinical 
features, choose the correct investigations and describe the principles 
of management of OME 
	
K/S 
	
SH 
	
Y 
	
LGT, SGT 
	
Written/ Viva voce 
 
EN 4.5 Elicit document and present a correct history, demonstrate and 
describe the clinical features, choose the correct investigations and 
describe the principles of management of ear discharge. 
	
K/S 
	
SH 
	
Y LGT, SGT, DOAP, Bedside 
clinic 
Written/ Viva voce/ 
Skill assessment 
 
EN 4.6 Elicit document and presen t a correct history demonstrate and 
describe the clinical features, choose the correct investigations and 
describe the principles of management of mucosal type of CSOM. 
	
K/S 
	
SH 
	
Y LGT, SGT, DOAP, Bedside 
clinic 
Written/ Viva voce/ 
Skill assessment 
 
EN 4.7 Elicit document and present a correct history, demonstrate and 
describe the clinical features, choose the correct investigations and 
describe the principles of management of squamosal type of CSOM. 
	
K/S 
	
SH 
	
Y LGT, SGT, DOAP, Bedside 
clinic 
Written/ Viva voce/ 
Skill assessment 
 
EN 4.8 Describe the clinical features, choose the correct investigations and 
the principles of management of complications of CSOM. K/S SH Y LGT, SGT Written/ Viva voce 
 
EN 4.9 Demonstrate the correct technique for wax removal from the ear in a 
simulated environment S SH Y Clinical demonstration / 
DOAP Skill assessment 3 
EN 4.10 Observe and describe the indications for and steps invo lved in 
myringotomy and tympanoplasty S KH Y Clinical , demonstration Written/ Viva voce 
 
EN 4.11 Observe and describe the indications for and steps involved in 
mastoidectomy S KH Y Clinical, demonstration Written/ Viva voce 
 
EN 4.12 Describe the clinical features, investigations and prin ciples of 
management of Acoustic neuroma K KH Y LGT, SGT Written/ Viva voce

53 
	
EN 4.13 
Describe the clinical features, investigations and principles of 
management of Otosclerosis 
	
K 
	
KH 
	
Y 
	
LGT, SGT 
	
Written/ Viva voce 
 
Number COMPETENCY 
The student should be able to 
Predominant 
Domain 
K/S/A/C 
Level 
K/KH/S 
H/P 
Core 
(Y/N) 
Suggested Teaching 
Learning method 
Suggested 
Assessment 
method 
Number 
Required to 
certify 
P 
	
EN 4.14 
Describe the clinical features, investigations, and principles of 
management of Conductive Hearing Loss and Sensorineural hearing 
loss including Sudden Sensorineural Hearing Loss and Noise Induced 
Hearing Loss. 
	
K 
	
KH 
	
Y 
	
LGT, SGT 
	
Written/Viva voce 
 
	
EN 4.15 
Describe the anatomy of eustachian tube and discuss the clinical 
features, investigations, and management of Eustachian tube 
disorders. 
	
K 
	
KH 
	
Y LGT, SGT /Flipped class 
room 
	
Written/Viva voce 
 
EN 4.16 Describe the clinical features, investigations, and principles of 
management of Facial Nerve palsy K KH Y LGT, SGT, Demonstration Written/Viva 
voce/Skill assessment 
 
EN 4.17 Describe the clinical features, investigations and management of 
Vertigo and assessment of vestibular functions. K KH Y LGT, SGT, Demonstration Written/Viva 
voce/Skill assessment 
 
EN 4.18 Describe the clinical features, investigations, and principles of 
management of Meniere’s Disease K KH N LGT, SGT Written/Viva voce 
 
EN 4.19 Describe the clinical features, investigations, and management of 
Tinnitus. K KH Y LGT, SGT Written/Viva voce 
 
EN 4.20 Describe the clinical features, investigations, and management of Deaf 
child. K/S KH Y LGT, SGT Written/ Viva voce 
 
EN 4.21 Elicit document and present a correct history demonstrate and 
describe the Causes, choose the correct investigations and describe 
the principles of management of Nasal Obstruction. 
	
K/S 
	
SH 
	
Y 
	
LGT, SGT, Demonstration Written/ Viva voce/ 
Skill assessment 
 
EN 4.22 Describe the clinical features, investigations and management of DNS 
and observe and discuss the indications for the steps in septoplasty. K/S KH Y Clinical demonstration Written/ Viva voce 
 
EN 4.23 Elicit document and present a correct history, demonstr ate and 
describe the clinical features, choose the correct investigations and 
describe the principles of management of Adenoids 
	
K/S 
	
SH 
	
Y LGT, SGT, DOAP, Bedside 
clinic 
Written/ Viva voce/ 
Skill assessment

54 
EN 4.24 Elicit document and pres ent a correct history, describe the clinical 
features, choose the correct investigations and describe the principles 
of management of Allergic Rhinitis 
	
K/S 
	
SH 
	
Y LGT, SGT, 
Demonstration 
Written/ Viva voce 
/skill assessment 
 
Number COMPETENCY 
The student should be able to 
Predominant 
Domain 
K/S/A/C 
Level 
K/KH/S 
H/P 
Core 
(Y/N) 
Suggested Teaching 
Learning method 
Suggested 
Assessment 
method 
Number 
Required to 
certify 
P 
	
EN 4.25 
Elicit document and present a correct history, describe the clinical 
features, choose the correct investigations and describe the principles 
of management of Vasomotor Rhinitis 
	
K/S 
	
SH 
	
Y 
	
LGT, SGT 
	
Written/ Viva voce 
 
EN 4.26 Elicit, document and present a correct history, describe the clinical 
features, choose the correct investigations and describe the principles 
of management of Acute & Chronic Rhinitis 
	
K/S 
	
SH 
	
Y 
	
LGT, SGT 
	
Written/ Viva voce 
 
EN 4.27 Elicit, document and present a correct history, describe the clinical 
features, choose the correct investigations and describe the principles 
of management of Nasal Polyps 
	
K/S 
	
SH 
	
Y LGT, SGT, 
Demonstration 
Written/ Viva voce 
/skill assessment 
 
EN 4.28 Elicit document and present a correct history, demonstr ate and 
describe the clinical features, choose the correct investigations and 
describe the principles of management of Epistaxis 
	
K/S 
	
SH 
	
Y LGT, SGT, DOAP, Bedside 
clinic 
Written/ Viva voce/ 
Skill assessment 
 
EN 4.29 Describe the clinical features, choose the correct investigations and 
describe the principles of management of OBSTRUCTIVE SLEEP APNEA. K/S SH N LGT, SGT Written/ Viva voce/ 
 
EN 4.30 Describe the clinical features, investigations and prin ciples of 
management of Head and Neck trauma. K/S KH N LGT, SGT. Written/ Viva voce 
 
EN 4.31 Describe the clinical features, investigations and principles o f 
management of nasopharyngeal Angiofibroma K KH Y LGT, SGT. Written/ Viva voce 
 
EN 4.32 Elicit document and present a correct history demonstrate and 
describe the clinical features, choose the correct investigations and 
describe the principles of management of Acute & Chronic Sinusitis 
and its Complications 
	
K/S 
	
SH 
	
Y 
	
LGT, SGT, Demonstration 
	
Written/ Viva voce/ 
Skill assessment 
 
EN 4.33 Describe the clinical features, investigations and principles o f 
management of Tumours of Nose, Nasopharynx and para nasal sinus K KH Y LGT, SGT, Written/ Viva voce 
 
EN 4.34 Describe the clinical features, investigation and management of 
granulomatous diseases of nose K KH N LGT, SGT Written/ viva voce

55 
EN 4.35 Describe the clinical features, investigations and principles o f 
management of diseases of the Salivary glands K KH N LGT, SGT Written/ Viva voce 
 
EN 4.36 Describe the clinical features, investigations and principles o f 
management of Deep Neck space Infection K KH Y LGT, SGT Written/ Viva voce. 
 
Number COMPETENCY 
The student should be able to 
Predominant 
Domain 
K/S/A/C 
Level 
K/KH/S 
H/P 
Core 
(Y/N) 
Suggested Teaching 
Learning method 
Suggested 
Assessment 
method 
Number 
Required to 
certify 
P 
EN 4.37 Elicit document and pres ent a correct history describe the clinical 
features, choose the correct investigations and describe the principles 
of management of dysphagia 
	
K/S 
	
SH 
	
Y 
	
LGT, SGT 
	
Written/ Viva voce 
 
EN 4.38 Elicit document and present a correct history, describe the clinical 
features, choose the correct investigations , complications and 
describe the principles of management of Acute & Chronic Tonsillitis 
	
K/S 
	
SH 
	
Y 
	
LGT, SGT, Bedside clinic 
Written/ Viva 
voce/Skill 
assessment 
 
EN 4.39 Observe and describe the indications for and steps involved in a 
tonsillectomy / adenoidectomy and its complications S KH Y Clinical, demonstration Written/ Viva voce 
 
EN 4.40 Elicit, document and present a correct history, describe the clinical 
features, choose the correct investigations and describe the principles 
of management of hoarseness of voice 
	
K/S 
	
SH 
	
Y 
	
LGT, SGT 
	
Written/ Viva voce 
 
EN 4.41 Describe the clinical features, investigations and principles o f 
management of Benign lesion of larynx, Acute & Chronic inflammation 
of larynx, laryngeal paralysis. 
	
K/S 
	
KH 
	
Y 
	
LGT, SGT 
	
Written/ Viva voce 
 
EN 4.42 Describe the clinical features, investigations and principles o f 
management of Malignancy of the Larynx & Hypopharynx. K KH Y LGT, SGT /Flipped 
classroom Written/ Viva voce 
 
EN 4.43 Describe the clinical features, investigations and principles o f 
management of Stridor K KH Y LGT, SGT Written/ Viva voce 
 
EN 4.44 Observe and describe the indications for and steps involved in 
tracheostomy and the care of the patient with a tracheostomy K KH Y Clinical, Demonstration Written/ Viva voce 
 
EN 4.45 Describe the Clinical features, Investigations and principles o f 
management of diseases of Oesophagus K KH N LGT, SGT Written/ Viva voce 
 
EN 4.46 Describe the clinical features, investigations and principles o f 
management of HIV manifestations of the ENT K KH N LGT, SGT /Flipped 
classroom Written/ Viva voce

56 
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
OBSTETRICS&GYNAECOLOGY(CODE:OG)

57 
Number COMPETENCY 
The student should be able to 
Predominant 
Domain 
K/S/A/C 
Level 
K/KH/S 
H/P 
Core 
(Y/N) 
Suggested Teaching 
Learning method 
Suggested Assessment 
method 
Number 
Required to 
certify 
P 
OBSTETRICS & GYNAECOLOGY(Topics:38, Competencies: 141) 
                      Topic 1:  Demographic and Vital Statistics Number of competencies:(05) Num ber of competencies that require certification:(NIL) 
OG1.1 Define and discuss birthrate, maternal mortality and morbidity and
maternal near miss 
K KH Y LGT,SGT Written  
OG1.2 Define and discuss perinatal mortality and morbidity including perinatal 
and neonatal mortality and morbidity audit 
K KH Y LGT,SGT Written  
OG1.3 Define and discuss still birth and abortion K KH Y LGT,SGT Written  
OG1.4 Define and discuss caesarean audit according to modified Robsons 
classification 
K KH Y LGT,SGT Written  
OG 1.5 Describe and discuss the national programs relevant to Obstetrics & 
Gynaecology including JSY, JSSK, birth & death registration, anaemia 
mukt bharat, SUMAN 
K KH Y LGT,SGT Written  
                   Topic 2:Anatomy of the female reproductive tract (Basic anatomy and embryology)       Number of competencies:(01)        Number of competencies that require certification:(NIL) 
OG2.1 Describe and discuss the development and anatomy of the female 
reproductive tract, relationship to other pelvic organs, applied anatomy 
as related to Obstetrics and Gynaecology. 
K KH Y LGT,SGT, SDL Written/Skill station  
                                                        Topic 3:Physiology of conception              Number of competencies:(01 )                                Nu m b e r o f c o mp e t e n c ie st h a t r e q uirecertification:(NIL) 
OG3.1 Describe  the physiology of ovulation,menstruation,fertilization,impla- 
ntation and gametogenesis. 
K K Y LGT,seminars, SDL Written  
                                              Topic 4:Development of the fetus and the placenta Number of competencies:(01) Nu mber of competencies that require certification:(NIL) 
OG4.1 Describe and discuss the basic embryology of fetus, factors influencing 
fetal growth and development, anatomy and physiology of placenta 
K K Y LGT,SGT, SDL Written

58 
 
Number COMPETENCY 
The student should be able to 
Predominant 
Domain 
K/S/A/C 
Level 
K/KH/S 
H/P 
Core 
(Y/N) 
Suggested Teaching 
Learning method 
Suggested Assessment 
method 
Number 
Required to 
certify 
P 
                         Topic 5:Preconception counselling Numbe ro f competencies:(02)  Number of competencies that require certification:(NIL) 
OG5.1 Describe, discuss and identify pre-existing medical disorders a nd 
d i s c u s s  t h e i r  m a n a g e m e n t  D M ,  H T ,  r e n a l  d i s o r d e r s ,  S L E ,  o b e s i t y , 
epilepsy & heart disease 
K/S SH Y LGT, Bedsideclinics Written/ 
clinicalassessme 
nt 
 
OG5.2 Determine maternal high ri sk factors and verify immunization status K/S SH Y LGT, Bedsideclinics, SDL Written/ 
clinicalassessme 
nt 
 
                     Topic 6:Diagnosis of pregnancy Number o f competencies:(01) Number o f competencies that require certification:(NIL) 
OG6.1 Describe, discuss and demonstrate the clinical features of pregnancy, 
derive and discuss its differential diagnosis,elaborate the principles 
underlying and interpret pregnancy tests. 
S SH Y LGT,SGT, Bedsideclinics Written/ 
Clinical 
assessment/Vivavoce 
 
                Topic 7:Maternal Changes in pregnancy Number of competencies:(01) Number of competencies that require certifica tion:(NIL) 
OG7.1 Describe and discuss the changes in the genital tract, breast, 
cardiovascular system, respiratory, haematology, renal and gastro 
intestinal system in pregnancy 
K KH Y LGT,seminars, SDL Written  
Topic 8:Antenatal Care Number of competencies:(10) Number of co mpetencies that require certification:(NIL) 
OG8.1 Enumerate, describe and discuss the objectives of antenatal care, 
assessment of period of gestation; screening for high-risk factors and 
concept of inverted pyramid of care 
K KH Y SGT, Bedsideclinics,LGT Written/Vivavoce/S 
killassessment 
 
OG8.2 Elicit document and present an obstetric history including menstrual 
history , last menstrual period, previous obstetric history, 
Comorbid conditions, past medical history and surgical history 
K/S SH Y SGT, Bedsideclinics,LGT Written/Vivavoce/S 
killassessment

59 
OG8.3 Describe, demonstrate, document and perform an obstetrical 
examination including a general and abdominal examination 
(symphysio- fundal height & abdominal girth) and clinical 
monitoring of maternal and fetal well-being 
K/S SH Y Bed-side clinic, DOAP Skill assessment  
Number COMPETENCY 
The student should be able to 
Predominant 
Domain 
K/S/A/C 
Level 
K/KH/S 
H/P 
Core 
(Y/N) 
Suggested Teaching 
Learning method 
Suggested Assessment 
method 
Number 
Required to 
certify 
P 
OG8.4 Describe and demonstrate clinical monitoring of maternal and fetal 
well- being including weight gain, DFMC, NST & BPP 
K/S SH Y Bedside clinic,  DOAP, SGT Skill 
assessment/Written 
/Viva voce 
 
OG8.5 Describe and demonstrate pelvic assessment& evaluation of 
CPD in a model 
K/S SH Y DOAP Skill assessment  
OG8.6 Assess and counsel a patient in a simulated environment regarding 
appropriate nutrition in pregnancy 
K/S SH Y DOAP, Bedside clinic Skill assessment  
OG8.7 Enumerate the indications for and types of vaccination in  pregnancy K KH Y LGT,SGT, SDL Written/Viva voce  
OG8.8 Enumerate the indications and describe the investigations includingthe
use of ultrasound in the initial assessment and monitoring in pregnancy 
K KH Y LGT,SGT Written/Viva voce  
OG 8.9 Describe and discuss causes of still births and their management K KH Y LGT, small group discussion Written, viva voce, 
practical case 
 
OG8.10 Describe and discuss cases of post caesarean pregnancy and thei r 
management 
K KH Y LGT, small group discussion Written, viva voce, 
practical case 
 
Topic 9: Complications in early pregnancy Number of competencies:(06) Numbe r of competencies that require certification:(NIL) 
OG9.1 Classify, define and discusses the aetiology and management of 
abortions including threatened, incomplete, inevitable, missed and 
Septic abortion 
K KH Y LGT,SGT Written/Viva voce  
OG 9.2 Classify, define and discusses the aetiology and management of 
Recurrent pregnancy loss 
K KH Y LGT,SGT Written/Viva voce  
OG9.3 Describe the steps and observe/ assist in the performance of an MTP 
evacuation (medical abortion, eva& MVA) 
S SH Y DOAP, Bedside clinic Viva voce

60 
Number COMPETENCY 
The student should be able to 
Predominant 
Domain 
K/S/A/C 
Level 
K/KH/S 
H/P 
Core 
(Y/N) 
Suggested Teaching 
Learning method 
Suggested Assessment 
method 
Number 
Required to 
certify 
P 
OG9.4 Discuss the aetiology, clinical features, differential diagnosi s of acute
abdomen in early pregnancy (with a focus on ectopic pregnancy) and 
enumerate the principles of medical and surgical management 
K KH Y LGT, SGT Written/Viva voce  
OG9.5 Discuss the clinical features, laboratory investigations, ultrasonography, 
differential diagnosis, principles of management and follow-up of 
gestational trophoblastic neoplasms 
K KH Y LGT, SGT Written/Viva voce  
OG9.6 Describe the etiopathology, impact on maternal and fetal health and 
principles of management of hyperemesis gravidarum 
K KH Y LGT,SGT Written/Viva voce  
Topic 10: Antepartum  haemorrhage  Number of competencies:(02) Number of competencies that require certification:(NIL) 
OG10.1 Define, classify and describe the aetiology, pathogenesis, clinical 
features, ultrasonography, differential diagnosis and management of 
antepartum haemorrhage in pregnancy 
K KH Y LGT,SGT, Bedside  clinic Written/Viva voce, 
clinical exam 
 
OG10.2 Enumerate the indications and describe the appropriate use of blood 
and blood products, their complications and management. 
K KH Y LGT,SGT, SDL Written/Viva voce  
Topic 11: Multiple pregnancies Number of competencies:(01) Numb er of competencies that require certification:(NIL) 
OG11.1 Describe the etiopathology, clinical features; diagnosis 
andinvestigations, complications, principles of management of multiple  
pregnancies 
K KH Y LGT, SGT, Bedside clinics Written/ 
OSCE/Clinical 
assessment/Viva voce 
 
Topic 12:  Medical Disorders in pregnancy Number of competencie s:(11) Number of competencies that require certification:(NIL) 
OG12.1 Define, classify and describe the etiology and pathophysiology, early 
detection, investigations; principles of management of hypertensive 
disorders of pregnancy and eclampsia, complications of eclampsia. 
K K H Y LGT,SGT, Bedside  clinics Written/Viva voce/ 
Skill assessment

61 
Number COMPETENCY 
The student should be able to 
Predominant 
Domain 
K/S/A/C 
Level 
K/KH/S 
H/P 
Core 
(Y/N) 
Suggested Teaching 
Learning method 
Suggested Assessment 
method 
Number 
Required to 
certify 
P 
OG12.2 Define, classify and describe the etiology, pathophysiology, diagnosis, 
investigations, adverse effects on the mother and foetus and 
management during pregnancy and labor,  and complications of anemia 
in pregnancy 
K KH Y LGT,SGT, Bedside clinics Written/Viva voce/ 
Skill assessment 
 
OG12.3 Define, classify and describe the etiology, pathophysiology, diagnosis, 
investigations, criteria, adverse effects on mother and foetus and the 
management during pregnancy and labor, and complications of diabetes
in pregnancy 
K KH Y LGT,SGT, Bedside  clinics Written/Viva voce/ 
Skill assessment 
 
OG12.4 Define, classify and describe the etiology, pathophysiology, diagnosis, 
investigations, criteria, adverse effects on  mother and foetus and the 
management during pregnancy and labor, and complications of heart 
diseases in pregnancy 
K KH Y LGT,SGT, Bedside clinics Written/Viva voce/ Skill 
assessment 
 
OG12.5 Describe the clinical features, detection, effect of pregnancy on 
thediseaseandimpactofthediseaseonpregnancycomplicationsandman 
agementofurinarytractinfectionsinpregnancy 
K KH Y LGT,SGT, Bedside clinics Skill assessment/ Skill 
assessment 
 
OG12.6 Describe the clinical features, detection, effect of pregnancy on 
disease and impact of the disease on pregnancy complications and 
management of liver disease in pregnancy 
K KH Y LGT,SGT, Bedside clinics Written/Viva voce/ 
Skill assessment 
 
OG12.7 Describe and discuss screening, risk factors, management of mother and 
new born with HIV 
K KH Y LGT,SGT, Bedside 
clinics, SDL 
Skill assessment  
OG12.8 Describe the mechanism, prophylaxis, fetal complications, diagnosis and 
management of iso-immunization in pregnancy 
K KH Y LGT,SGT, Bedside clinics Written/Viva voce/ 
Skill assessment 
 
OG 12.9 Describe the mechanism, prophylaxis, fetal complications, diagnosis and 
management of thyroid disorders in pregnancy 
K KH Y LGT,SGT, Bedside clinics Written/Viva voce  
OG 12.10 Describe the mechanism, prophylaxis, fetal complications, diagnosis and 
management of gynaecological & surgical disorders in pregnancy 
K KH Y LGT,SGT, Bedside clinics Written/Viva voce

62 
Number COMPETENCY 
The student should be able to 
Predominant 
Domain 
K/S/A/C 
Level 
K/KH/S 
H/P 
Core 
(Y/N) 
Suggested Teaching 
Learning method 
Suggested Assessment 
method 
Number 
Required to 
certify 
P 
OG12.11 Describe and discuss causes, clinical features, diagnosis, 
investigations; monitoring of fetal well- being, including 
ultrasound and fetal Doppler; principles of management; 
prevention and counselling in intrauterine growth 
retardation 
K,S KH Y LGT,SGT, Bedsideclinics Written/ skill 
assessment/ Viva voce 
 
Topic 13:Labour Number of competencies:(08) Number of competenc ies that require certification:(01) 
OG 13.1 Enumerate and discuss the diameters of maternal pelvis and types K K H Y LGT,SGT, DOAP, Bedside
clinic 
Written/Viva voce/ 
Skill assessment 
 
OG 13.2 Discuss the mechanism of normal labor K/S SH Y SGT, skill lab OSCE  
OG13.3 Enumerate and discuss the physiology of normal labor, mechanism of 
labor in occipito-anterior presentation; monitoring of labor including 
partogram and labour care guide; conduct of labor, pain relief; 
principles of induction and acceleration of labor; management of third 
stage of labor. 
K/S KH Y LGT, SGT (with models
/videos/AV aids, etc.) 
Written/Clinical  
assessment/viva      
voce 
 
OG13.4 Define, describe the causes, pathophysiology, diagnosis, investigations 
and management of preterm labor, PROM and post-dated pregnancy 
K/S KH Y LGT,
SGT, Bedside clinics 
Written/ OSCE/ 
Clinical  assessment 
/Viva voce 
 
OG13.5 Observe/assist in the performance of an artificial rupture of 
membranes 
S S H N DOAP, Bedside clinic Skill assessment  
OG13.6 Demonstrate the stages of normal labor in a simulated environment
/mannequin 
S S H Y DOAP Skillassessment  
OG13.7 Observe and assist the conduct of a normal vaginal delivery S P Y DOAP Logbook 10 
OG 13.8 Discuss and describe com ponents of respectful maternity care K/S KH Y LGT,
SGT, Bedsideclinics 
Written/ OSCE/Clinical 
assessment/Viva voce

63 
Number COMPETENCY 
The student should be able to 
Predominant 
Domain 
K/S/A/C 
Level 
K/KH/S 
H/P 
Core 
(Y/N) 
Suggested Teaching 
Learning method 
Suggested Assessment 
method 
Number 
Required to 
certify 
P 
Topic 14: Abnormal  Labour Number of competencies:(03) Number o f competencies that need certification:(NIL) 
OG14.1 Define and describe obstructed labor, its clinical features; prevention; 
and management 
K K H Y LGT,SGT, DOAP, 
Bedside clinic 
Written/Viva voce/ 
Skill assessment 
 
OG14.2 Describe and discuss rupture uterus, causes, diagnosis and 
management. 
K KH Y LGT,SGT, DOAP, 
Bedside clinic 
Written/Viva voce/ 
Skill assessment 
 
OG14.3 Describe and discuss the classification; diagnosis; management of 
abnormal labor (occipitoposterior position, breech, face, transverse lie)
K KH Y LGT, SGT, Bedside clinics Written/ skill 
assessment 
 
Topic 15: Operative obstetrics Number of competencies:(02) Numb er of competencies that require certification:(NIL) 
OG15.1 Enumerate and describe the indications and steps of common 
obstetric competencies, technique and complications: Episiotomy, 
vacuum extraction; low forceps; Caesarean section, assisted breech 
delivery; external cephalic version; cervical cerclage 
S K H Y LGT, SGT, seminars Written/ skill 
assessment 
 
OG15.2 Observe and assist in the performance of an episiotomy and 
demonstrate the correct suturing technique of an episiotomy in a 
simulated environment. Observe /Assist in operative obstetrics cases 
–including-CS, Forceps, vacuum extraction, and breech delivery 
S S H Y DOAP, Bedside clinic Skill assessment  
Topic 16: Complications of the third stage Number of competenci es:(04) Number of competencies that require certification: (01) 
OG16.1 Enumerate and discuss causes, prevention, diagnosis, management, 
appropriate use of blood and blood products in post-partum 
haemorrhage 
K/S KH 
SH 
Y LGT,SGT, Bedside clinics Written/ skill 
assessment

64 
Number COMPETENCY 
The student should be able to 
Predominant 
Domain 
K/S/A/C 
Level 
K/KH/S 
H/P 
Core 
(Y/N) 
Suggested Teaching 
Learning method 
Suggested Assessment 
method 
Number 
Required to 
certify 
P 
OG 16.2 Describe and demonstrate different techniques used to manage 
PPH including bimanual and aortic compression, intrauterine 
balloon tamponade, non-pneumatic anti shock garment 
Application 
K/S P Y SGT, skill lab Written/ skill 
assessment 
3 
OG16.3 Describe and discuss uterine inversion– 
causes, prevention, diagnosis and management. 
K K H Y LGT, SGT, Bedside clinics Written/Viva voce  
OG16.4 Describe and discuss causes, clinical features, diagnosis, 
investigations; monitoring of fetal well- being, including 
ultrasound and fetal Doppler; principles of management; 
prevention and counselling in intrauterine growth 
retardation 
K/S KH Y LGT,SGT, Bedside 
clinics, SDL 
Written/ skill 
assessment/ 
Viva  voce 
 
Topic 17: Lactation Number of competencies:(03) Number of compe tencies that require certification:(NIL) 
OG17.1 Describe and discuss the physiology of lactation& discuss baby friendly 
hospital initiatives 
K K H Y LGT,SGT Written/Viva voce  
OG17.2 Counsel in a simulated environment, care of the breast, importance and 
the technique of breast-feeding 
S/A/C SH Y DOAP Skill assessment  
OG17.3 Describe and discuss the clinical features, diagnosis and management of 
mastitis and breast abscess 
K K H Y LGT,SGT Written/Viva voce  
Topic 18:Care of the  newborn Number of competencies:(04) Numbe r of competencies that require certification:(NIL) 
OG18.1 Describe and discuss the assessment of maturity of the newborn, 
diagnosis of birth asphyxia, principles of resuscitation, common 
problems. 
K K H Y LGT, SGT Written/Viva voce  
OG18.2 Demonstrate the steps of neonatal resuscitation in a simulated 
environment 
S S H Y DOAP Skill assessment  
OG18.3 Describe and discuss the diagnosis of birth asphyxia K K H Y LGT, SGT Written/Viva voce  
OG18.4 Describe the principles of resuscitation of the new-born and enumerate 
the common problems encountered 
K K H Y LGT, SGT Written/Viva voce

65 
Number COMPETENCY 
The student should be able to 
Predominant 
Domain 
K/S/A/C 
Level 
K/KH/S 
H/P 
Core 
(Y/N) 
Suggested Teaching 
Learning method 
Suggested Assessment 
method 
Number 
Required to 
certify 
P 
Topic 19: Normal and abnormal puerperium Number of competencies : (04) Number of competencies that require certification:(01) 
OG19.1 Describe and discuss the physiology of puerperium, its complications, 
diagnosis and management; counselling for contraception, puerperal 
sterilization 
K K H Y LGT,SGT, Bedside clinics Written/Viva voce  
OG19.2 Counsel in a simulated environment, contraception and puerperal  
Sterilisation 
S/A/C SH Y DOAP Skill assessment 2 
OG19.3 Observe/assist in the performance of tubal ligation S K H Y DOAP, intraoperative Skill assessment  
OG19.4 Describe & disc uss PPIUCD programme K K / K H Y LGT, SGT Written/Viva  voce  
Topic 20: Medical termination of pregnancy Number of competenci es:(03) Number of competencies th at require certification:(NIL) 
OG20.1 Enumerate the indications and describe and discuss the legal aspects, 
indications, methods for first and second trimester MTP; complications 
and management of complications of Medical Termination of Pregnancy
K K H Y LGT, SGT, SDL Written/Viva  voce  
OG20.2 In a simulated environment administer informed consent to a person 
wishing to undergo Medical Termination of Pregnancy 
S/A/C SH Y DOAP Skill assessment  
OG20.3 DiscussPre- conception and PreNatal Diagnostic Techniques (PC & PNDT) 
Act 1994 & its amendments 
K K / K H Y LGT,  SGT, SDL Written/Viva voce  
Topic 21: Contraception Number of competencies:(02) Number of c ompetencies that require certification:(NIL) 
OG21.1 Describe and discuss the temporary and permanent methods of 
contraception, indications, technique and complications; selection of 
patients, side effects and failure rate including OCs, male contraception,
emergency contraception and IUCD 
K KH Y LGT,SGT, Bedside clinics Written/Viva voce/ 
Skill assessment

66 
Number COMPETENCY 
The student should be able to 
Predominant 
Domain 
K/S/A/C 
Level 
K/KH/S 
H/P 
Core 
(Y/N) 
Suggested Teaching 
Learning method 
Suggested Assessment 
method 
Number 
Required to 
certify 
P 
OG21.2 Enumerate the indications for, describe the steps in and insert and
remove an intrauterine device in a simulated environment 
S SH Y DOAP Skill assessment  
Topic: Vaginal discharge Number of competencies:(02) Number of competencies that require certification:(NIL) 
OG22.1 Describe the clinical characteristics of physiological vaginal 
discharge. 
K KH Y LGT, SDL Written  
OG22.2 Describe and discuss the etiology (with special emphasis on Candida, 
T. vaginalis, bacterial vaginosis), characteristics, clinical diagnosis, 
investigations, genital hygiene, management of common causes and 
the syndromic management 
K KH Y LGT, Bedside clinics, SDL Written/Viva voce/ 
Skill assessment 
 
Topic 23: Normal and abnormal puberty Number of competencies:(0 3) Number of competencies that require certification:(NIL) 
OG23.1 Describe and discuss thephysiology of puberty, features of abnormal 
puberty, common problems and their management 
K KH Y LGT, SGT, Bedside 
clinics, SDL 
Written/Viva voce  
OG23.2 Enumerate the causes of delayed puberty. Describe the investigation and
management of common causes 
K KH Y LGT, SGT Written/Viva voce  
OG23.3 Enumerate the causes of precocious puberty K K N LGT, SGT Written/Viva voce  
Topic 24:  Abnormal uterine bleeding Number of competencies:(01 ) Number of competencies that require certification: (NIL) 
OG24.1 Define, classify and discuss abnormal uterine bleeding, its 
aetiology, clinical features, investigations, diagnosis and 
management 
K K H Y LGT, SGT Written/Viva voce  
Topic 25: Amenorrhea Number of co mpetencies: (01) Number of com petencies that require certification:(NIL) 
OG25.1 Describe and discuss the causes of primary and secondary amenorrhea, 
its investigation and the principles of management. 
K K H Y LGT, SGT Written/Viva voce

67 
Number COMPETENCY 
The student should be able to 
Predominant 
Domain 
K/S/A/C 
Level 
K/KH/S 
H/P 
Core 
(Y/N) 
Suggested Teaching 
Learning method 
Suggested Assessment 
method 
Number 
Required to 
certify 
P 
Topic 26: Genital injuries and fistulae Number of competencies: (02) Number of competencies that require certification:(NIL) 
OG26.1 Describe the causes, prevention, clinical features, principles of 
management of genital injuries and fistulae 
K K H N LGT, SGT Written/Viva voce  
OG26.2 Describe the causes, prevention, clinical features, principles of 
management of genital injuries and fistulae 
K K H N LGT, SGT Written/Viva voce  
Topic 27: Genital infections Number of competencies:(03) Number  of competencies that require certification:(NIL) 
OG27.1 Describe and discuss the etiology, pathology, clinical features, 
differential diagnosis, investigations, management and long term 
implications of sexually transmitted infections (concept of 
syndromic management) 
K K H Y LGT, SGT, SDL Written/Viva voce  
OG27.2 Describe and discuss the etiology, pathology, clinical features, 
differential diagnosis, investigations, management and long-term 
implications of genital tuberculosis 
K K H Y LGT, SGT Written/Viva voce  
OG27.3 Describe and discuss the etiology, pathology, clinical features, 
differential diagnosis, investigations, management and long term 
implications of Pelvic Inflammatory Disease 
K K H Y LGT,  SGT Written/Viva voce  
Topic 28: Infertility Number of competencies:(04) Number of com petencies that require certification:(NIL) 
OG28.1 Describe and discuss the common causes, pathogenesis, clinical features, 
differential diagnosis; investigations; principles of management of 
infertility – methods of tubal patency, Ovulation induction, assisted 
reproductive techniques 
K K H Y LGT, seminars, Bedside 
clinics, SDL 
Written/Viva voce  
OG28.2 Enumerate the assessment and restoration of tubal patency K K N LGT, seminars, Bedside 
clinics, SDL 
Written/Viva voce  
OG28.3 Describe the principles of ovulation induction K K H Y LGT, seminars, Bedside clinics, 
SDL 
Written/Viva voce

68 
Number COMPETENCY 
The student should be able to 
Predominant 
Domain 
K/S/A/C 
Level 
K/KH/S 
H/P 
Core 
(Y/N) 
Suggested Teaching 
Learning method 
Suggested Assessment 
method 
Number 
Required to 
certify 
P 
OG28.4 Enumerate the various Assisted Reproduction Techniques K K N LGT, seminars, Bedside 
clinics, SDL 
Written/Viva voce  
Topic 29: Uterine fibroids Number  of competencies: (01) Number of competencies that require certification:(NIL) 
OG29.1 Describe and discuss the etiology; pathology; clinical features; 
differential diagnosis; investigations; principles of management, 
complications of fibroid uterus 
K K H Y LGT, Bedside clinics Written/ O SCE/ 
Clinical Assessment 
/Viva voce 
 
Topic 30: PCOS and hirsutism Number of competencies:(02) Number  of competencies that require certification:(NIL) 
OG 30.1 Describe and discuss the etiopathogenesis; clinical features; differential 
diagnosis; investigations; management, complications of PCOS 
K/A/C KH Y LGT, bedside clinic, SDL Written/ OSCE / 
Clinical Assessment 
/Viva voce 
 
OG30.2 Enumerate the causes and describe the investigations and management 
of hyper-androgenism 
K K H N LGT Written/ OSCE/ Clinical 
Assessment/Viva voce 
 
Topic 31: Uterine prolapse Number of competencies: (01) Number of competencies that require certification:(NIL) 
OG31.1 Describe and discuss the etiology, classification, clinical 
features, diagnosis, investigations, principles of management and 
preventive aspects of prolapse of uterus 
K/S KH Y LGT, small group discussion, 
Bedside clinics 
Written/Viva voce/ 
Skill assessment 
 
Topic 32: Menopause Number of competencies:(02) Number of compe tencies that require certification:(NIL) 
OG32.1 Describe and discuss the physiology of menopause, symptoms, 
prevention, management and the role of hormone replacement 
therapy. 
K K H Y LGT, small group discussion, 
Bedside clinics 
Written/Viva voce  
OG32.2 Enumerate the causes of post-menopausal bleeding and describe its 
management 
K K H Y LGT, small group discussion 
Bedside clinics 
Written/Viva voce/ 
clinical assessment

69 
Number COMPETENCY 
The student should be able to 
Predominant 
Domain 
K/S/A/C 
Level 
K/KH/S 
H/P 
Core 
(Y/N) 
Suggested Teaching 
Learning method 
Suggested Assessment 
method 
Number 
Required to 
certify 
P 
Topic 33: Benign, Pre-malignant (CIN) and Malignant Lesions of the Cervix     
Number of competencies:(05) 
 
Number of competencies that require certification: ( 0 1) 
 
OG33.1 Classify, describe and discuss the etiology, pathology, clinical features, 
differential diagnosis, investigations and staging of cervical cancer 
K/S KH Y LGT,SGT, Bedside clinics Written/Viva voce/ 
Skill assessment 
 
OG33.2 Describe the principles of management including surgery and 
radiotherapy of and Malignant Lesions of the Cervix 
K K H Y LGT, SGT, Bedside 
clinics, SDL 
Written/Viva voce/ 
Skill assessment 
 
OG33.3 Describe and demonstrate the screening for cervical cancer in a 
simulated environment 
K/S SH Y DOAP, SDL Skill assessment  
OG33.4 Enumerate the methods to prevent cancer of cervix including visual 
inspection  with acetic acid (VIA), visual inspection of cervix with 
Lugol's iodine(VILI),pap smear and colposcopy 
K/S K
SH 
Y LGT, SGT, Bedside 
clinics, SDL 
Vivavoce/Written/Skill 
assessment 
3 
OG 33.5 Describe the principles of management of benign and premalignant 
lesions of cervix (Cryotherapy, thermal ablation & LEEP) 
K K H Y LGT, small group discussion Written, viva voce, 
OSCE 
 
 
Topic 34: Benign and malignant diseases of uterus and ovaries.         Number of competencies:(06) 
  
Number of competencies that require certification:(NIL) 
 
OG34.1 Describe and discuss aetiology, pathology, staging clinical features, 
differential diagnosis, investigations, staging laparotomy and principles of 
management of endometrial cancer 
K KH Y LGT, Bedside clinics Viva voce/Written  
OG34.2 Describe and discuss etiology, pathology, classification, staging of 
ovarian cancer, clinical features, differential diagnosis, investigations, 
principal of management including staging laparotomy 
K/S KH Y LGT, bedside clinic Written/OSCE/clinical 
assessment/ 
Viva voce 
 
OG34.3 Describe and discuss etiology, pathology, classification, staging, clinical 
features, differential diagnosis, investigations and management of gestational
trophoblastic disease 
K KH Y LGT Written/OSCE/clinical 
Assessment/

70 
Number COMPETENCY 
The student should be able to 
Predominant 
Domain 
K/S/A/C 
Level 
K/KH/S 
H/P 
Core 
(Y/N) 
Suggested Teaching 
Learning method 
Suggested Assessment 
method 
Number 
Required to 
certify 
P 
OG34.4 Operative Gynaecology : Understand and describe the 
technique and complications:Dilatation & Curettage (D&C); 
EA- ECC;cervical biopsy; 
K/S SH Y Videos on manikins, observe 
competencies and surgeries in 
OR 
Viva voce/ OSCE  
OG34.5 Operative Gynaecology : Understand and describe the technique and 
complications of abdominal hysterectomy; myomectomy; surgery for ovarian 
tumours; staging laparotomy;vaginal hysterectomy including pelvic floor 
repair; Fothergill’s operation, Laparoscopy; hysteroscopy; management of 
postoperative complications 
K/S KH Y Videos on manikins, observe 
competencies and surgeries in 
OR 
Viva voce, theory  
OG 34.6 Describe and discuss the etiopathogenesis, clinical features; investigation 
and implications on health and fertility and management of endometriosis 
and adenomyosis 
K/S KH Y LGT,SGT Written/Viva voce  
 
Topic 35: Obstetrics & Gynecological skills-I Number of compete ncies:(20) Number of competencie s that require certification:(12) 
OG35.1 Obtain a logical sequence of history, and perform a humane and 
thorough clinical examination, excluding internal examinations (per- 
rectal and per-vaginal) 
K/S SH Y Bedside clinics Clinical assessment / 
Viva voce 
5 
OG35.2 Arrive at a logical provisional diagnosis after examinat ion. K/S SH Y Bedside clinics Clinical assessment / 
Viva voce 
5 
OG35.3 Recognize situations, which call for urgent or early treatment at secondary 
and tertiary centres and make a prompt referral of such patients after giving 
first aid or emergency treatment. 
K/S SH Y Bedside clinics Clinical assessment/ 
Viva voce 
 
OG35.4 Describe, discuss and demonstrate examination, differential diagnosis and 
management of a case of suprapubic lump in abdomen 
K/S SH Y Bedside clinics Clinical assessment/ 
Viva voce 
 
OG 35.5 Describe, discuss and demonstrate examination, differential diagnosis and 
management of a case of vaginal discharge 
K/S SH Y Bedside clinics Clinical assessment / 
Viva voce 
 
OG35.6 Describe, discuss and demonstrate examination, differential diagnosis and 
management of a case of genital ulcers 
K/S SH Y Bedside clinics Clinical assessment/ 
Viva voce 
 
OG35.7 Demonstrate inter-personal and communication skills befitting a physician in 
order to discuss illness and its outcome with patient and family 
A/C SH Y Bedside clinics Clinical assessment/ Viva 
voce/ OSCE 
2

71 
Number COMPETENCY 
The student should be able to 
Predominant 
Domain 
K/S/A/C 
Level 
K/KH/S 
H/P 
Core 
(Y/N) 
Suggested Teaching 
Learning method 
Suggested Assessment 
method 
Number 
Required to 
certify 
P 
OG35.8 Determine gestational age, EDD and obstetric formula K/S  SH Y Bedside clinics Clinical assessment/ Viva 
voce, OSCE 
5 
OG35.9 Demonstrate ethical behavior in all aspects of medical p ractice. A/C SH Y Bedside clinics Clinical assessment / 
Viva voce 
 
OG35.10 Obtain informed consent for any examination /procedure S SH Y Bedside clinics Clinical assessment / 
Viva voce 
 
OG35.11 Write a complete case record with all necessary details  S SH Y Bedside clinics Clinical assessment / 
Viva voce 
5 
OG35.12 Write a proper discharge summary with all relevant info rmation S SH Y Bedside clinics Clinical assessment 2 
OG35.13 Write a proper referral note to secondary or tertiary centres or to other 
physicians with all necessary details. 
S SH Y Bedside clinics Clinical assessment / 
Viva voce 
2 
OG35.14 Demonstrate the correct use of appropriate universal precautions for self- 
protection against HIV and hepatitis and counsel patients 
S SH Y DOAP Skill assessment 2 
OG35.15 Obtain a PAP sm ear in a stimulated environment S SH Y D OAP Skill assessment 3 
OG35.16 Demonstrate the correct technique to perform artificial rupture of membranes  
In a simulated/ supervised environment 
S SH Y DOAP Skill assessment 2 
OG35.17 Demonstrate the correct technique to perform and suture episiotomies in a 
simulated/ supervised environment 
S SH Y DOAP Skill assessment 2 
OG35.18 Demonstrate the correct technique to insert and remove an IUD in a simulated 
/supervised environment 
S SH Y DOAP Skill assessment  
OG35.19 Diagnose and provide emergency management of antepartum and postpartum
hemorrhage in a simulated /guided environment 
K/S SH Y DOAP Skill assessment  
OG35.20 Demonstratethecorrecttechniqueofurinarycatheterisationinasimulated/su 
pervisedenvironment 
S SH Y DOAP Skill assessment 3 
 
Topic 36: Obstetrics &Gynecological skills-II Number of compete ncies:(03) Number of competencie s that require certification:(NIL) 
OG36.1 Plan and institute a line of treatment, which is need based, cost-
effective and appropriate for common conditions taking in to 
consideration 
(a) Patient 
(b) Disease 
(c) Socio-economic status 
(d) Institution/ Governmental guidelines. 
K/S SH Y Bedside clinics,SGT Clinical assessment/ 
Viva voce

72 
Number COMPETENCY 
The student should be able to 
Predominant 
Domain 
K/S/A/C 
Level 
K/KH/S 
H/P 
Core 
(Y/N) 
Suggested Teaching 
Learning method 
Suggested Assessment 
method 
Number 
Required to 
certify 
P 
OG36.2 Organise antenatal, post-natal, and family welfare clini cs K/S KH Y Bedsideclinics Clinical Assessment/  
Viva voce 
 
OG36.3 Demonstrate the correct technique of punch biopsy of cervix in a simulated 
/supervised environment 
S SH Y Bedsideclinics Clinical assessment/ 
Viva voce 
 
Topic 37: Obstetrics & Gynecological skills-III Number of compe tencies:(07) Number of competenc ies that require certification:(NIL) 
OG37.1 Observe and assist in the performance of a Caesarean sec tion K/S/A/C SH Y Bedside clinics,SGT Logbook  
OG37.2 Observe and assist in the performance of Laparotomy K/S/ A/C SH Y Bedside clinics,SGT Clinical assessment / 
Vivavoce 
 
OG37.3 Observe and assist in the performance of Hysterectomy– 
abdominal/ vaginal 
K/S/A/C SH Y Bedside clinics,SGT Clinical assessment/ Viva 
voce 
 
OG37.4 Observe and assist in the performance of Dilatation & Curettage (D&C) K/S/A/C SH Y Bedside clinics,SGT Clinical assessment/ 
Viva voce 
 
OG37.5 Observe and assist in the performance of Endometrial 
aspiration- endocervical curettage (EA-ECC) 
K/S/A/C SH Y Bedside clinics, SGT Viva voce  
OG37.6 Observe and assist in the performance of outlet forceps application of vacuum 
and breech delivery 
K/S/A/C SH Y Bedside clinics, SGT Log book  
OG37.7 Observe and assist in the performance of MTP in the first trimester and 
evacuation in incomplete abortion 
K/S/A/C SH Y Bedside clinics, SGT Clinical assessment / 
Viva voce 
 
 
Topic 38:Should observe Number of competencies:(04) Number of c ompetencies that require certification:(NIL) 
OG38.1 Laparoscopy K/S/A/C KH Y Bedside clinic, SGT Clinical assessment/ 
Viva voce 
 
OG38.2 Hysteroscopy K/S/A/C KH Y Bedside clinics, SGT Clinical assessment/ 
Viva voce 
 
OG38.3 Lap sterilization K/S/A/C KH Y Bedside clinics, SGT Clinical assessment/ 
Viva voce 
 
OG38.4 Assess the need for  
And issue proper medical certificates to patients for various purposes 
K/S/A/C KH Y Bedside clinics, SGT Clinical assessment/ 
Viva voce

73 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ORTHOPEDICS(CODE:OR)

74 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Number COMPETENCY 
The student should be able to 
Predominant 
Domain 
K/S/A/C 
Level 
K/KH/S 
H/P 
Core
(Y/N) 
Suggested Teaching 
Learning method 
Suggested 
Assessment 
method 
Number 
Required to 
certify 
P 
ORTHOPEDICS(Topics:14, Competencies: 40) 
Topic 1: Skeletal Trauma, Poly trauma Number of competencies : (06) Number of competencies that require certification: (NIL) 
OR1.1 Describe and discuss the Principles of pre-hospital care and Emergency 
room managementofatraumavictimincludingprinciplesof triage and 
advance trauma life support. 
K/S/A/C K/KH Y LGT with video, SGT Written/Vivavoce/ 
OSCE/ Simulation 
 
OR1.2 Describe and discuss the etiopathogenesis, clinical features, 
investigations, and principles of management of shock 
K/S K/KH Y LGT Written/Vivavoce/ 
OSCE/ Simulation 
 
OR1.3 Describe and discuss the etiopathogeneses, clinical features, 
investigations, and principles of management of soft tissue injuries 
K KH/SH Y LGT,SGT Written/OSCE  
OR1.4 Describe and discuss the etiopathogenesis, clinical features, 
investigations, and principles of management of dislocation of 
common joints, shoulder, knee, hip and fingers. 
K K/KH Y LGT,SGT,Bedside clinic Written/Vivavoce/ 
OSCE/ Simulation 
 
OR1.5 
Participate as a member in the team for closed reduction of shoulder 
dislocation / hip dislocation / knee dislocation and dislocation of finger 
joints, 
K/S/A/C SH Y Simulation,DOAP OSCE/Simulation  
OR1.6 Discuss the recent advances in the management of various 
orthopaedic conditions like trauma, sports injuries, arthroplasty and 
spine pathologies. 
K K/KH N SGT,bedside clinic Viva voce/OSCE  
Topic 2: Fractures                                                       Number of competencies : (16)                                       Number of competencies that require certification: (NIL) 
OR2.1 Describe and discuss the mechanism of Injury, clinical features, 
investigations and plan management of fracture of clavicle 
K/S KH/SH Y LGT,SGT,Bedside clinic Written/Viva voce/ 
OSCE

75  
Number COMPETENCY 
The student should be able to 
Predominant 
Domain 
K/S/A/C 
Level 
K/KH/S 
H/P 
Core
(Y/N) 
Suggested Teaching 
Learning method 
Suggested 
Assessment 
method 
Number 
Required to 
certify 
P 
OR2.2 Describe and discuss the mechanism of Injury, clinical features, 
investigations and plan management of fractures of proximal humerus 
K K/KH/ SH Y LGT,SGT,Bedside clinic Written/Vivavoce/ 
OSCE 
 
OR2.3 Select, prescribe and communicate appropriate medications for relief of 
joint pain 
K K H / S H Y LGT,SGT,Bedside clinic Written/Vivavoce/ 
OSCE 
 
OR2.4 Describe and discuss the mechanism of injury, clinical features, 
investigations and principles of management of fracture of shaft 
of humerus and intercondylar fracture humerus with emphasis 
on neurovascular deficit 
K/S K/KH Y LGT,SGT,Bedside clinic Written/Vivavoce/ 
OSCE 
 
OR2.5 Describe and discussthe aetiopathogenesis, clinical features, 
mechanism of injury, investigation & principles of management of 
fractures of both bones forearm and Galeazzi and Monteggia injury 
K K / K H Y LGT,SGT, Bedside clinic Written/Vivavoce/ 
OSCE 
 
OR2.6 Describe and discuss the aetiopathogenesis, mechanism of injury , 
clinical features, investigations and principles of management of 
fractures of distal radius 
K K H Y LGT,SGT, Bedside clinic Written/Vivavoce/ 
OSCE 
 
OR2.7 Describe and discuss the aetiopathogenesis, mechanism of injury , 
clinical features, investigations and principles of management of 
pelvic Pelvi-Acetabular injuries with emphasis on hemodynamic 
instability 
K K/KH/ SH Y LGT,SGT, Bedside clinic Written/Vivavoce/ 
OSCE 
 
OR2.8 Describe and discuss the aetiopathogenesis, mechanism of injury, clinical
features, investigations and principles of management of spine injuries 
with emphasis on mobilisation of the patient 
K K / K H Y LGT,SGT, Bedside clinic Written/Vivavoce/ 
OSCE 
 
OR2. 2.9 Describe an discuss the aetiopathogenesis, mechanism of injury,  
clinical features, investigations and principles of management of 
fractures of proximal femur including neck of femur and 
intertrochanteric fractures. 
K/S/A/C KH Y LGT,SGT, Bedside clinic Written/Vivavoce/ 
OSCE

76  
Number COMPETENCY 
The student should be able to 
Predominant 
Domain 
K/S/A/C 
Level 
K/KH/S 
H/P 
Core
(Y/N) 
Suggested Teaching 
Learning method 
Suggested 
Assessment 
method 
Number 
Required to 
certify 
P 
OR2.10 Describe and discuss the aetiopathogenesis, mechanism of injury, 
clinical features, investigations and principles of management of  
(a) Fracture patella (b)Fracture distal femur(c)Fracture proximal tibia 
with special focus on neurovascular injury and compartment 
syndrome 
K K / K H Y LGT,SGT, Bedside clinic Written/Vivavoce/ 
OSCE 
 
OR2.11 Describe and discuss the aetiopathogenesis, clinical features, 
investigations and principles of management of Fracture shaft of 
femur in all age groups and the recognition and management of 
fat embolism as a complication 
K K / K H Y LGT,SGT, Bedside clinic Written/Vivavoce/ 
OSCE 
 
OR 2.12 Describe and discuss the aetiopathogenesis, clinical features, 
Investigation and principles of management of: 
(a) Fracture both bones leg 
(b) Calcaneus 
(c) Small bones of foot 
(d) Lisfranc fracture dislocation 
K K / K H Y LGT,SGT, Bedside clinic Written/Vivavoce/ 
OSCE 
 
OR2.13 Describe and discuss the aetiopathogenesis, clinical features, 
Investigation and principles of management of ankle fractures 
K/S/C K/KH Y LGT,SGT, Bedside clinic Written/Vivavoce/ 
OSCE 
 
OR 2.14 Plan and interpret the investigations to diagnose complicationsof 
fractures like malunion, non-union and infection. 
K/S SH Y LGT,SGT, Bedside clinic Written/Vivavoce/ 
OSCE 
 
OR 2.15 Describeand discuss the mechanism of injury, clinical features, 
investigations and principles of management of open fractures with 
focus on secondary infection prevention and management. 
K K / K H Y LGT,SGT, Bedside clinic Written/Vivavoce/ 
OSCE 
 
OR2.16 Describe and discuss the mechanism of injury, clinical features, 
investigationsandprinciplesofmanagementof following orthopaedic 
injuries in children: 
a) Fracture supracondylar humerus with emphasis on neurovascular 
injury and compartment syndrome. 
b) Forearm and distal end radius fractures, pulled elbow. 
c) Epiphyseal injuries 
K K / K H Y LGT,SGT, Bedside clinic Written/Vivavoce/ 
OSCE

77  
Number COMPETENCY 
The student should be able to 
Predominant 
Domain 
K/S/A/C 
Level 
K/KH/S 
H/P 
Core
(Y/N) 
Suggested Teaching 
Learning method 
Suggested 
Assessment 
method 
Number 
Required to 
certify 
P 
 d) Fracture shaft femur, tibia/ both bones of the leg 
e) Non-accidental injuries / child abuse 
      
Topic 3: Musculoskeletal Infection                                              Number of competencies:(03)                   Number of Procedures that require certification:(NIL) 
OR3.1 Describe and discuss the aetiopathogenesis, clinical features, 
investigations and principles of management of Bone and Joint infections
a) Acute Osteomyelitis 
b) Subacute osteomyelitis 
c) Septic arthritis & HIV infection 
d) Chronic osteomyelitis 
K/S K/KH/ SH Y LGT,SGT,Video 
assistedlecture 
Written/Vivavoce/ 
OSCE 
 
OR3.2 Participate as a member in team for aspiration of joints under 
supervision 
K/S/A/C SH Y Small group 
Discussion.DOAP 
Vivavoce/OSCE/ 
Skills 
assessment 
 
OR3.3 Participateasamemberinteamforcompetencieslikedrainageof abscess, 
sequestrectomy/ saucerisation and arthrotomy 
K/S/A/C SH Y DOAP,Video 
demonstration 
Vivavoce/OSCE/ 
Skills 
assessment 
 
Topic 4: Skeletal Tuberculosis Number of competencies : (01 Num ber of competencies that require certification: NIL 
OR4.1 Describe and discuss the clinical features, Investigation and 
principlesofmanagementofTuberculosisaffectingmajorjoints (Hip, 
Knee) including cold abscess and caries spine 
K K / K H Y LGT,SGT,Case discussion Written/Vivavoce/ 
OSCE 
 
Topic 5:Rheumatoid Arthritis and associated inflammatory disorders Number of competencies:(01) Number of competencies that req uire certification:(NIL) 
OR5.1 Describe how to approach to a case of poly arthritis discuss the 
aetiopathogenesis, clinical features, investigations and principles of 
management of various inflammatory disorder of joints like 
rheumatoid arthritis, ankylosing spondylitis and psoriatic arthritis. 
K K / K H Y LGT,SGT, Bedside clinic Written/Vivavoce/ 
OSCE 
 
T o p i c  6 :  D e g e n e r a t i v e  d i s o r d e r s                                    Number of competencies:(01) Number of competencies that requ ire certification:(NIL)

78  
Number COMPETENCY 
The student should be able to 
Predominant 
Domain 
K/S/A/C 
Level 
K/KH/S 
H/P 
Core
(Y/N) 
Suggested Teaching 
Learning method 
Suggested 
Assessment 
method 
Number 
Required to 
certify 
P 
OR6.1 Enumerate the causes of low back pain, 
Describe and discuss the clinical features, investigations and 
principles of management of degenerative condition of spine 
(Cervical Spondylosis, Lumbar Spondylosis, PID) 
K K / K H Y LGT,SGT,Case discussion Written/Vivavoce/ 
OSCE 
 
Topic 7: Metabolic bone disorders             Number of compete ncies:(01) Number of competencies that require certification:(N IL) 
OR7.1 Describe and discuss the aetiopathogenesis, clinical features, 
investigation and principles of management of metabolic bone 
disorders in particular osteoporosis, osteomalacia, rickets,Paget's 
disease.Discuss the deformities in rickets and their management. 
K K / K H Y LGT,SGT, Case discussion Written/Vivavoce/ 
OSCE 
 
Topic 8:     Poliomyelitis                                                                     Number of competencies:(01) Num ber of competencies that require certification:(NIL) 
OR8.1 Describe and discuss the aetiopathogenesis, clinical features, 
assessment and principles of management a patient with Post-
Polio Residual Paralysis 
K K / K H Y LGT,SGT, Case discussion Written/Vivavoce/ 
OSCE 
 
Topic 9: CerebralPalsy                                                                Number of competencies:(01) Number of co mpetencies that require certification:(NIL) 
OR9.1 Describe and discuss the aetiopathogenesis, clinical features, 
assessment and principles of management of Cerebral palsy patient 
K K / K H Y LGT,SGT Written/Vivavoce/ 
OSCE 
 
Topic 10: BoneTumors                                                             Number of competencies:(01)                             Number of competencies t hat require certification:(NIL) 
OR10.1 Describe and discuss the aetiopathogenesis, clinical features, 
investigations andprinciples ofmanagement of benign and malignant 
bonetumorsand pathological fractures 
K K / K H Y LGT,SGT, Video assisted 
interactive lecture 
Written/Vivavoce/ 
OSCE

79  
Number COMPETENCY 
The student should be able to 
Predominant 
Domain 
K/S/A/C 
Level 
K/KH/S 
H/P 
Core
(Y/N) 
Suggested Teaching 
Learning method 
Suggested 
Assessment 
method 
Number 
Required to 
certify 
P 
Topic 11:Peripheral nerve injuries                                                       Number of competencies:(01) Number of  competencies that require certification:(NIL) 
OR11.1 Describe the aetiopathogenesis, clinical features, investigations 
andprinciples ofmanagement of peripheral nerve injuries. Discuss the 
management of Radial, Ulnar, Median, Lateral Popliteal and Sciatic 
Nerve injuries. Demonstrate splints used in footdrop, wristdrop and 
clawhand. 
K K / H Y LGT,SGT, case discussion Written/Vivavoce/ 
OSCE 
 
Topic 12: Congenital lesions Numb er of competencies:(01) Number  of competencies that require certification:(NIL) 
OR12.1 Describe and discuss the clinical features, investigations and 
principles of management of Congenital and acquired 
malformations and deformities of: 
a. Limbs and spine-Scoliosis and spinal bifida 
b. Congenital dislocation of Hip, Torticollis, 
c. Congenital talipes equinovarus 
K K H Y LGT,SGT Written/Vivavoce/ 
OSCE 
 
Topic 13:Procedural Skills                                                                            Number of competencies:(02)                   Number of comp etencies that require certification:(NIL) 
OR13.1 Participate in a team for competencies in patients and demonstrating 
the ability to perform on mannequins / simulated patients in the 
following: 
i. Above elbow plaster 
ii. Below knee plaster 
iii. Above knee plaster 
iv. Thomas splint 
v. Splinting for long bone fractures 
vi. Strapping for shoulder and clavicle trauma 
S/A KH/ SH Y Case discussion,Video 
assisted LGT,SGT, 
Teaching, Skill lab sessions 
OSCE withSimulation 
based assessment

80  
Number COMPETENCY 
The student should be able to 
Predominant 
Domain 
K/S/A/C 
Level 
K/KH/S 
H/P 
Core
(Y/N) 
Suggested Teaching 
Learning method 
Suggested 
Assessment 
method 
Number 
Required to 
certify 
P 
OR13.2 Participate as a member in team for Resuscitation of Polytrauma victim 
by doing all of the following: 
(a) I.V. access central-peripheral 
(b) Bladder catheterization 
(c) Endotracheal intubation 
(d) Splintage 
S/A KH/ SH Y Case discussion, Video 
assisted LGT,SGT, 
Teaching, Skill lab sessions 
OSCE with Simulation 
based assessment 
 
Topic 14:  CounsellingSkills                                                                         Number of competencies:(03) Number of competencies that require certification:(NIL) 
OR14.1 Demonstrate the ability to counsel patients regarding prognosis in 
patients with various orthopedic illnesses like 
a. Fractures with disabilities 
b. Fractures that require prolonged bed stay 
c. Bone tumors 
d. Congenital disabilities 
K/S/A/C KH/ SH Y Case discussion, Video 
assisted lecture, SGT, 
Teaching, Skills lab sessions 
OSCE withSimulation 
based assessment 
 
OR14.2 Demonstrate the ability to counsel patients to obtain consent for  
various orthopedic competencies like limb amputation, permanent 
fixations etc.. 
K/S/A/C KH/ SH Y Case discussion, Video 
assisted LGT,SGT, 
Teaching, Skills lab 
sessions 
OSCE with Simulation 
based assessment 
 
OR14.3 Demonstrate the ability to convince the patient for referral to a 
higher center in various orthopedic illnesses like acute osteomyelitis. 
septic arthritis, neurovascular injuries and low back pain with red 
flags, based on the detection of warning signals and need for 
appropriate management 
K/S/A/C KH/ SH Y Case discussion, Video 
assistedLGT,SGT, Teaching, 
Skills lab sessions 
OSCE with Simulation 
based assessment 
 
OR14.4 Describe various amputations of the lower limb. Discuss the ideal 
stump and various prosthesis used in rehabilitation of patient with 
below knee amputation. 
K/A K/KH Y LGT, small group discussion/ 
bed side clinic 
OSCE, Clinical case 
presentation

81  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ANAESTHESIOLOGY (CODE: AS)

82  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Number COMPETENCY 
The student should be able to 
Predominant 
Domain 
K/S/A/C 
Level 
K/KH/S 
H/P 
Core 
(Y/N) 
Suggested Teaching 
Learning method 
Suggested 
Assessment 
method 
Number 
Required to 
certify 
P 
ANAESTHESIOLOGY(Topics:11, Competencies: 52) 
Topic 1: Anaesthesiology as a specialty                                      N u m b e r  o f  c o m p e t e n c i e s :  ( 0 4 )                         Number of competencies that require certification: (NIL) 
AS1.1 Describe the evolution of Anaesthesiology as a modern specialty K K N LGT Written/ Viva voce  
AS1.2 Describe the roles of Anaesthesiologist in the medical profession 
(including as a peri-operative physician, in the intensive care and high 
dependency units, in the management of acute and chronic pain, 
including labour analgesia, in the resuscitation of acutely ill)
K K N LGT Written/ Viva voce  
AS1.3 Enumerate and describe the principleo f ethi c sa si tr elates to 
Anaesthesiology K K N LGT Written/ Viva voce  
AS1.4 Describe the prospects of Anaesthesiology as a career K K N LGT Written/ Viva voce  
T o p i c  2 :  C a r d i o p u l m o n a r y  r e s u s c i t a t i o n                                                                                                           N u m b e r of competencies: (02 )                                           Number of competencies that require certification : (02) 
AS2.1 Enumerate the indications, describet hes t e p sa nd demonstrate in a 
simulated environment, Basic Life Support in adults, children and 
neonates 
K/S SH N DOAP Skill assessment 2 
AS2.2 Enumerate the indications, describe the steps and demonstrate in a 
simulated environment, Advanced Life Support in adults and children 
S S H N DOAP Skill assessment 2 
Topic 3: Preoperative evaluation and medication        Number o f competencies: (06 )                                           Number of competencies that require certification : (02) 
AS3.1 Describe the principles of preoperative evaluation K K H Y LGT, SGT Written/ Viva voce  
AS3.2 Elicit, present and document an appropriate history including 
medication history in a patient undergoing Surgery as it pertains to a 
preoperative anaesthetic evaluation 
S S H Y DOAP,
Bedside clinic 
Skill station 2 
AS3.3 Demonstrate and document an appropriate clinical examination in a 
patient undergoing General Surgery 
S S H Y DOAP,
Bedside clinic 
Skill station 2

83  
Number COMPETENCY 
The student should be able to 
Predominant 
Domain 
K/S/A/C 
Level 
K/KH/S 
H/P 
Core 
(Y/N) 
Suggested Teaching 
Learning method 
Suggested 
Assessment 
method 
Number 
Required to 
certify 
P 
        
AS3.4 Choose and interpret appropriate testing for patients undergoing 
Surgery 
S S H Y DOAP,
Bedside clinic 
Skill station  
AS3.5 Determine the readiness for General Surgery in a patient based on 
the preoperative evaluation 
S S H Y DOAP,
Bedside clinic 
Skill station  
AS3.6 Choose and write a prescription for appropriate premedications for 
patients undergoing surgery 
S S H Y DOAP,
Bedside clinic 
Skill station  
Topic 4: General Anaesthesia                                                       Number of competencies:(07)                                       Number of competencies that require certification : (NIL) 
AS4.1 Describe and discuss the pharmacology of drugs used in induction
and maintenance of general anaesthesia (including intravenous and 
inhalation induction agents, opiate and non-opiate analgesics, 
depolarising and non depolarising muscle relaxants, 
anticholinesterases) 
K K H Y LGT, SGT Written/ Viva voce  
AS4.2 Describe the anatomy of the airway and its implications for general
Anaesthesia K K H Y LGT, SGT Written/ Viva voce  
AS4.3 Observe and describe the principles and the practical aspects of
induction and maintenance of anesthesia 
S K H Y LGT, SGT, DOAP Written/ Viva voce  
AS4.4 Observe and describe the principles and the steps/ techniques in
maintenance of vital organ functions in patients undergoing surgical 
competencies 
S K H Y LGT, SGT, DOAP Written/ Viva voce  
AS4.5 Observe and describe the principles and the steps/ techniques in 
monitoring patients during anaesthesia 
S K H Y LGT, SGT, DOAP Written/ Viva voce  
AS4.6 Observe and describe the principles and the steps/ techniques 
involved in day care anesthesia 
S K H Y LGT, SGT, DOAP Written/ Viva voce  
AS4.7 Observe and describe the principles and the steps/ techniques 
involved in anaesthesia outside the operating room 
S K H Y LGT, SGT, DOAP Written/ Viva voce  
T o p i c  5 :  R e g i o n a l  a n a e s t h e s i a                                            N u m b e r o f  c o m p e t e n c i e s : ( 0 6 )  N u m b e r  o f  c o m p e t e n c i e s  t h a t require certification: (NIL) 
AS5.1 Enumerate the indications for and describe the principles of regional
anaesthesia (including spinal, epidural and combined) 
K K H Y LGT, SGT Written/ Viva voce

84  
Number COMPETENCY 
The student should be able to 
Predominant 
Domain 
K/S/A/C 
Level 
K/KH/S 
H/P 
Core 
(Y/N) 
Suggested Teaching 
Learning method 
Suggested 
Assessment 
method 
Number 
Required to 
certify 
P 
AS5.2 Describe the correlative anatomy of the brachial plexus, 
subarachnoid and epidural spaces 
K K H Y LGT, SGT Written/ Viva voce  
AS5.3 Observe and describe the principles and steps/ techniques involved
in peripheral nerve blocks 
S K H Y LGT, SGT, DOAP Written/ Viva voce  
ASS.4 Observe and describe the pharmacology and correct use of 
commonly used drugs and adjuvant agents in regional anesthesia 
S K H Y LGT, SGT, DOAP Written/ Viva voce  
AS5.5 Observe and describe the principles and steps/ techniques involved 
in caudal epidural in adults and children 
S K H Y LGT, SGT, DOAP Written/ Viva voce  
AS5.6 Observe and describe the principles and steps/ techniques involved
in common blocks used in surgery (including brachial plexus blocks) 
S K H Y LGT, SGT, DOAP Written/ Viva voce  
Topic 6: Post-anaesthesia recovery                       Number  o f  c o m p e t e n c i e s :  ( 0 3 )                                N u m b e r  o f  competencies that require certification: (NIL) 
AS6.1 Describe the principles of monitoring and resuscitation in the 
recovery room 
S K H Y LGT, SGT, DOAP Written/ Viva voce  
AS6.2 Observe and enumerate the contents of the crash cart and describe 
the equipment used in the recovery room 
S K H Y LGT, SGT, DOAP Written/ Viva voce  
AS6.3 Describe the common complications encountered by patients in the
recovery room, their recognition and principles of management 
K K H Y LGT, SGT, DOAP Written/ Viva voce  
Topic 7: Intensive Care Management                        Numbe r of competencies: (05)                                                                Number of competencies that require certification: (NIL) 
AS7.1 Visit, enumerate and describe the functions of an Intensive Care 
Unit 
S K H Y LGT, SGT, DOAP Written/ Viva voce  
AS7.2 Enumerate and describe the criteria for admission and discharge of 
a patient to an ICU 
S K H Y LGT, SGT, DOAP Written/ Viva voce  
AS7.3 Observe and describe the management of an unconscious patient S K H Y LGT, SGT, DOAP Written/ Viva voce  
AS7.4 Observe and describe the basic setup process of a ventilator S K H Y LGT, SGT, DOAP Written/ Viva voce  
AS7.5 Observe and describe the principles of monitoring in an ICU S K H Y LGT, SGT, DOAP Written/ Viva voce  
Topic 8: Pain and its management                         Number  of competencies: (05)                                                                 Number of competencies that require certification: (NIL) 
AS8.1 Describe the anatomical correlates and physiologic principles of
Pain 
K KH Y LGT, SGT, DOAP Written/ Viva voce  
AS8.2 Elicit and determine the level, quality and quantity of pain and its 
tolerance in patient or surrogate 
S K H Y LGT, SGT, DOAP Written/ Viva voce

85  
Number COMPETENCY 
The student should be able to 
Predominant 
Domain 
K/S/A/C 
Level 
K/KH/S 
H/P 
Core 
(Y/N) 
Suggested Teaching 
Learning method 
Suggested 
Assessment 
method 
Number 
Required to 
certify 
P 
AS8.3 Describe the pharmacology and use of drugs in the management of 
pain 
K K H Y LGT, SGT, DOAP Written/ Viva voce  
AS8.4 Describe the principles of pain management in palliative care K K H Y LGT. SGT, DOAP Written/ Viva voce  
AS8.5 Describe the principles of pain management in the terminally ill K KH Y LGT, SGT, DOAP Written/ Viva voce  
Topic 9: Fluids                                                                     Number of competencies: (04)                                                       Number of competencies that require certification: (NIL) 
AS9.1 Establish intravenous access in a simulated environment S K H Y SGT, DOAP Skill assessment  
AS9.2 Establish central venous a ccess in a simulated environment S K H Y SGT, DOAP Skill assessment  
AS9.3 Describe the principles of fluid therapy in the preoperativeperiod K K H Y LGT, SGT, DOAP Written/ Viva voce  
AS9.4 Enumerate blood products and describe the use of blood products 
in the preoperative period 
K K H Y LGT, SGT, DOAP Written/ Viva voce  
Topic 10: Patient safety                                                       Number of competencies:(04)                                                         Number of competencies that require certification: (NIL) 
AS10.1 Enumerate the hazards of incorrect patient positioning K K H Y LGT, SGT, DOAP Written/ Viva voce  
AS10.2 Enumerate the hazards encountered in the perioperative period and
steps/techniques taken to prevent them 
K K H Y LGT, SGT, DOAP Written/ Viva voce  
AS10.3 Describe the role of communication in patient safety K K H Y LGT, SGT, DOAP Written/ Viva voce  
AS10.4 Define and describe common medical and medication errors in 
anaesthesia 
K K H Y LGT, SGT, DOAP Written/ Viva voce  
Topic 11: Oxygen Delivery Devices, Oxygen Therapy and Airway Management        Number of Competencies: 06                     Number of competencies that require certification:0 6 
AS11.1 Describe oxygen delivery devices - nasal cannulas, simple face masks, 
Venturi masks non-rebreathing masks, BVM, and HFNC. 
Understand the indications in accordance with clinical scenarios. 
Demonstrate correct setup and usage of oxygen delivery devices 
ensuring patient safety and device efficiency. 
K KH Y LGT, SGT, DOAP Written/ Viva voce, 
OSCE 
 
AS11.2 Describe the principles of oxygen therapy, importance of FiO2, flow 
rate adjustment, monitoring and safety precautions during oxygen 
therapy. 
S SH Y LGT, SGT, DOAP Written/ Viva voce 
OSCE 
 
AS11.3 Describe and demonstrate the techniques of opening the a irway 
(head tilt, chin lift, jaw thrust) in a simulated environment. 
S SH Y LGT, SGT, DOAP Written/ Viva voce 
OSCE 
 
AS11.4 Observe and demonstrate correct insertion of oropharynge al and 
nasopharyngeal airways. 
S SH Y LGT, SGT, DOAP Written/ Viva voce 
OSCE 
 
AS11.5 Enumerate the indications of advanced airway management.  
Describe the steps and demonstrate in a simulated environment - 
S SH Y LGT, SGT, DOAP Written/ Viva voce, 
OSCE

86  
Number COMPETENCY 
The student should be able to 
Predominant 
Domain 
K/S/A/C 
Level 
K/KH/S 
H/P 
Core 
(Y/N) 
Suggested Teaching 
Learning method 
Suggested 
Assessment 
method 
Number 
Required to 
certify 
P 
 manual ventilation by BVM, Endotracheal intubation, and LMA 
insertion. 
      
AS11.6 Ventilation Techniques 
Explain the principle and settings of mechanical ventilation. 
S SH Y LGT, SGT, DOAP Written/ Viva voce, 
OSCE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RADIODIAGNOSIS (CODE: RD)

87  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Number COMPETENCY 
The student should be able to 
Predominant 
Domain 
K/S/A/C 
Level 
K/KH/S 
H/P 
Core 
(Y/N) 
Suggested Teaching 
Learning method 
Suggested 
Assessment 
method 
Number 
Required to 
certify 
P 
RADIODIAGNOSIS (Topics:7, Competencies: 21) 
Topic 1: General principles of imaging equipmentNumber of competencies:(01) Number o f competencies that require certification: (NIL) 
RD1.1 Knowledgeable about the general principles of functioning  of 
imaging modalities such as Plain Xray, Fluoroscopy, CT, Ultrasound, 
Nuclear medicine modalities (bone scan, PET) and MRI, to the extent 
that they would be able to (a) exhibit mindful behavior regardi ng 
the potential hazards associated with each imaging modality (b) 
make rational choices about the appropriateness of the modality for 
a particular purpose, such as what will be seen better in which 
modality (E.g.: air containing structures would be imaged bette r in 
x-ray than in ultrasound) 
K,A SH Y Hospital rounds 
demonstrating equipment 
and signages, Case based 
interactive lecture or case- 
based discussion for 
modality selection 
Written, viva voce  
Topic 2: Rational choice of modality for a patient Number o f competencies:(02) Number o f competencies that require certification: (NIL) 
RD2.1 Obtain relevant clinical h istory to select patients for imaging 
modalities, in order toto determine suitability for radiation 
exposure/contrast administration/exposure to magnetic fields 
(including allergies, renal function, pregnancy, implanted devices) 
K,C SH Y Case scenario-based 
discussions in lecture, SGT 
for history taking 
Direct observation, 
OSCE 
 
RD2.2 Select the correct imaging modality and procedure for broad 
pathology type (infections, tumour, trauma, congenital), body 
part/system (CNS, head and neck, chest, abdomen and extremities) 
in adults, children and pregnancy women, mindful of unique needs 
of pediatric patients with respect to radiation and sedation. 
K,A SH Y Case scenario-based 
discussion in lecture, SGT 
Written, viva voce  
Topic 3: Safety and legal requirementsNumber of competencies:(04Number of competencies that require certification: (NIL)
RD3.1 Awareness of different types of radiation and the stochastic  and K,A K Y Flipped classroom, SDL Written, viva voce

88  
 non-stochastic hazards of radiation in human beings (acute and 
long-term) 
      
RD3.2 Knowledgeable about best practices (time, distance and shielding) 
and provisions to keep x-ray exposure ALARA (as low as reasonably 
achievable) in clinical practice of radiology and general principles to 
be followed as per AERB regulatory guidelines 
K,A KH Y LGT Written, viva voce  
RD3.3 Knowledgeable about monitoring radiation exposure in heal th care 
workers with dosimeter such as thermoluminescent dosimeter and 
awareness of the units to measure radiation exposure in human 
Beings 
K,A K N Demonstration of TLD 
badge, SDL 
Written, viva voce  
RD3.4 Knowledgeable about the purpose and components of the PC-PNDT 
act relevant to a primary care physician 
K,A K Y LGT Viva voce  
Topic 4: Interdisciplinary communication and interaction Number o f competencies:(03) Number o f competencies that require certification: (NIL) 
RD4.1 Collaborate with imaging sp ecialists for optimum patient care - 
provide relevant and clear clinical information in requisitions for 
imaging, convey appropriate clinical urgency to facilitate correct 
scheduling of patients for imaging, clarify from imaging specialists 
when in doubt about appropriateness of imaging procedure 
K,A,C SH Y SGT Written, viva voce  
RD4.2 Apply appropriate safety measures when transporting critically ill 
patients for imaging competencies such as checking adequacy of 
oxygen cylinder, following correct precautions in MRI room. 
K,A SH Y SGT Viva voce, Written  
RD4.3 For diseases that can be encountered by primary care physician such 
as osteoarthritis (x-ray), deep vein thrombosis, cholecystitis, apply 
anatomical-radiological-pathophysiology correlations as a basis of 
clinical reasoning and inter-disciplinary communication 
K,C KH N SGT Viva voce  
Topic 5: Image interpretation Number o f competencies:(04) Number o f competencies that require certification: (NIL) 
RD5.1 Interpretation of normal X -ray images of the Chest, Abdomen, 
Musculoskeletal system by identi fying normal structures in Ches t X- 
ray, Abdominal X-ray, Musculoskeletal X-ray (upper limbs, lower 
limbs, spine), PNS – Water’s view in adults; normal neonatal Chest x- 
ray (thymic shadow identification); normal joint x-ray in children 
(epiphysis and growth plate identification) 
K P Y Image based LGT Written, OSCE  
RD5.2 Age estimation from X-rays by selecting and using appropriate 
reference standards 
K SH Y SDL Written, OSCE  
RD5.3 Image interpretation of emergency conditions in Chest Xra y, 
Abdominal Xray and skeletal X-rays such as pneumoperitoneum, 
K P Y SGT, Clinics Written, viva voce, 
OSCE

89  
 acute fracture, differentiating acute from chronic fracture etc.       
RD5.4 Image interpretation of no rmal/abnormal position of devices in the 
Chest X-ray of adult and pediatric ICU patients 
K P Y SGT, Clinics Written, 
OSCE/OSPE 
 
Topic 6: Patient preparation for imaging competencies Number o f competencies (01) Number o f competencies that require certification: (NIL) 
RD6.1 Ability to provide written and verbal instructions tailored to the 
patient and imaging procedure such as fasting requirement, 
medication adjustments, bowel preparation 
K,C,A SH Y LGT, SGT Viva voce, case- 
based questions 
 
Topic 7: Role of imaging in hospital specialties Number o f competencies:(06) Number o f competencies that require certification: (NIL) 
RD7.1 Integrate provided imaging findings and description of ap pearances 
in the management of PCOD, ectopic pregnancy, evaluation of 
infertility in the Obstetrics and Gynecology Department 
K KH Y SGT with images, Clinics Written, 
OSCE/OSPE 
 
RD7.2 Integrate provided imaging findings and description of ap pearances 
in the management of ASOM/CSOM, evaluation of sensorineural 
hearing loss in the ENT Department 
K KH Y SGT with images, Clinics Written, 
OSCE/OSPE 
 
RD7.3 Integrate provided imaging findings and description of ap pearances 
in the management of stroke (CT brain), pulmonary embolism, 
findings associated with cardiac failure and liver parenchymal 
diseases in the Internal Medicine Department 
K KH Y SGT with images, Clinics Written, 
OSCE/OSPE 
 
RD7.4 Integrate provided imaging findings and description of ap pearances 
in the management of head injuries, hernia with strangulation, 
appendicitis and intestinal obstruction in the Surgery Department 
K KH Y SGT with images, Clinics Written, 
OSCE/OSPE 
 
RD7.5 Integrate provided imaging findings and description of ap pearances 
in the management chest infections, foreign body aspiration, 
Urinary Tract Infection in the Paediatrics Department 
K KH Y SGT with images, Clinics Written, 
OSCE/OSPE 
 
RD7.6 Integrate provided imaging findings and description of ap pearances 
in the screening for breast cancer and management of breast cancer 
patients. 
K KH Y SGT with images, Clinics Written, 
OSCE/OSPE

90  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LIST OF CONTRIBUTORS

91  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Anatomy 
 
Chairperson:Dr. Praveen R Singh,Professor of Anatomy and Medical Education,Assistant Dean, Basic Sciences Education, Convener, NMC executive committee on FDP, 
Convenor, NMC-Nodal Centre for MET,Pramukhswami Medical College,Karamsad-388325, Gujarat. 
 
Members: 
1. Dr. Praveen B Iyer,Professor (Additional), Department of Anatomy, Convenor, NMC Nodal CentreSeth G S Medical College, Parel, Mumbai – 400012, Maharashtra 
2. Dr. Vivek Singh Malik, Professor, Department of Anatomy, Pt. B.D. Sharma PGIMS, Rohtak, 124001, Haryana 
3. Dr. Raghunath Shahaji More, Professor, Department of Anatomy, Institute of Medical Sciences, BANARAS HINDU University, Varanasi-221005,Uttar Pradesh 
4. Dr. G Manoj Kumar Reddy, Senior Associate Professor, Department of Anatomy, Government Medical College, Kadapa, 516002, Andhra Pradesh. 
 
 
 
Biochemistry 
 
Chairperson: Dr.KavitaratiDharwadkar, Professor and Head, Director Clinical Biochemistry, Faculty Regional Centre for Medicaleducation Technologies, SAIMS, Sri Aurobindo 
Medical College and PGI, SAU, Indore453555, Madhya Pradesh 
Members: 
1. Dr. Vilas U. Chavan, Professor & Head, Dept of Biochemistry, SMIMER, Surat, 395010Gujarat.. 
2. Dr.Rachna Sabharwal, Professor & Head, Dept. of Biochemistry, Government Medical College, Jammu 180001, Jammu & Kashmir 
3. Dr.S P Mishra, Professor & Head, Dept. Of Biochemistry, Institute of Medical Sciences, BHU, Varanasi, 221001, Uttar Pradesh 
4. Dr.Mainak Roy, Associate Professor, Dept. of Biochemistry, Faculty, NMC Regional Centre Jorhat Medical College, Jorhat, 785001Assam

92  
Physiology 
Chairperson: Dr. Aparna Garg, Professor and Head, Department of Physiology, Convenor, NMC- Regional Center Mahatma Gandhi Medical College and Hospital, Sitapura 
Jaipur 302022 Rajasthan. 
Members: 
1. Dr.Debasish Chakraborty, Professor, Department of Physiology, Agartala Govt. Medical College Kunjavan, Agartala 799006Tripura (West). 
2. Dr. Ravi Kaushik, Associate Professor, Department of Physiology, Maulana Azad Medical College & Associated Hospitals, New Delhi- 110002. 
3. Dr.TriptiWaghmare, Professor, Department of Physiology, JNMC, DMIHER(DU), Sawangi (M), Wardha, 442001, Maharashtra 
4. Dr.Rajiva Kumar Singh, Prof & HOD, Department of Physiology, Government of Bihar , Patna Medical college Patna 800004, Bihar. 
Microbiology 
Chairperson: Dr.NamrataKumari, Professor and Head, Department of Microbiology, Convenor, NMC Regional Centre (RC-MET), Indira Gandhi Institute of Medical Sciences, 
Patna- 800014 , Bihar. 
Members: 
1. Dr. Suman Singh, Professor and Head, Department of Microbiology, Co-Convenor, NMC Nodal Centre, Pramukh Swami medical College, Karamsad -388325, Gujarat. 
2. Dr. Purnima Barua, Former Convenor, NMC Regional Centre- Jorhat, Professor, Department of Micro biology, Tinsukia Medical College, Tinsukia- 786146, Assam. 
3. Dr.Amresh Kumar Singh, Associate professor and Head, Department of Microbiology, Member, Medical Education Unit, BRD Medical College, Gorakhpur-273013, Uttar 
Pradesh 
4. Dr. M R Vasanthapriyan, Associate Professor, Institute of Microbiology, Member, NMC Regional Centre (RC-MET),Madurai Medical College Madurai-625020, Tamil 
Nadu 
 
Pathology 
 
Chairperson: Dr. Mrs. SunitaVagha, Professor and Controller of Examination, Department of Pathology, Jawaharlal Nehru Medical College DMIHER, SawangiMeghe, Wardha- 
442005, Maharashtra 
Members: 
1. Dr. Cherry Shah, Professor and Dean, Department of Pathology, Smt NHL Municipal Medical College, Ahmadabad- 380014, Gujarat 
2. Dr. V. Geeta, Professor and HOD, Department of Pathology, Kakatiya Medical College, Warangal- 506007, Telangana 
3. Dr. K. Chandramouleeswari, Professor and Head, Institute of Child Health, Madras Medical College, Chennai- 600008, Tamil Nadu 
4. Dr.Anirudha V Kushtagi, Professor and Head, Department of Pathology, Koppal Institute of Medical Sciences, Koppal- 583231, Karnataka 
 
Pharmacology

93  
Chairperson: Dr. Dinesh Kuma Badyal, Vice Principal (Med Edu), Professor & Head, Department of  Pharmacology, National Convener, NMC-Advance Course in Medical 
Education, Convener, NMC Nodal Center for Faculty Development, Member-NMC National Curriculum Committee, Christian Medical Col lege, Ludhiana-141008, Punjab 
Members: 
1. Dr.Shipra Jain, Professor, Dept of Pharmacology, MEU Resource Faculty, NMC-RC, Mahatma Gandhi Medical College &Hospital Jaipur-302022 Rajasthan. 
2. Dr .TruptiRekha Swain, Prof and Head, Dept of Pharmacology, MEU Faculty member, NMC Regional Centre, S C B Medical College, Cuttack, 753007,Odisha. 
3. Dr.JuhiKalra,Professor, Department of Pharmacology, Convenor, NMC Regional Centre, Himalayan Institute of Medical Sciences (HIMS),Dehradun-248001,Uttarakhand 
4 Dr. Ashish Yadav, Professor a nd Head, Department of Pharmacology, UNS Autonomous State Medical College, Jaunpur - 222003, Uttar Pradesh. 
 
Forensic Medicine & Toxicology 
Chairperson: Dr Sandeep SitaramKadu, Controller of Examinations , Maharashtra University of Health Sciences, Nashik,422004, Maharashtra. 
Members: 
1. Dr. Rajesh Kumar Baranwal, Professor(FMT) & Principal, Maharshi Devraha Baba Autonomous State, Medical College, Deoria 274001, Uttar Pradesh. 
2. Dr.RaktimPratimTamuli, Associate Professor, Dept. of Forensic Medicine and Toxicology, Gauhati Medical College, Guwahati - 781032, Assam 
3. Dr.Venkatesan M, Associate Prof essor, Sri Ramachandra Medical College and Research Institute, Porur, Chennai 600116, Tamil Nadu 
4. Dr. Sanjoy Das, Professor & Head, Forensic Medicine & Toxicology, Himalayan Institute of Medical Sciences, Jolly Grant, Dehradun- 248140, Uttarakhand 
 
Community Medicine 
Chairperson: Dr.Dr.Annarao Kulkarni, Professor and Head, Community Medicine, Sri Madhusudan Sai Institute of Medical Sciences and Research Muddenahalli: 562101, 
Chikkaballapur District, Karnataka 
Members: 
1. Dr. Pankaj B. Shah, Associate Dean Research, Professor, Department of Community Medicine, SRMC & RI, Sri Ramachandra Institute of Higher Education & Research 
(SRIHER), NMC Executive Committee member of FDP, Member DOME, NMC SRMC Nodal center,Porur, Chennai 600116, Tamil Nadu, 
2. Dr. Gaurav Kamboj, Associate Professor, Dept of Community Medicine, Deputy Dean (Academics), Kalpana Chawla Government Medical College, Karnal- 132001 
Haryana 
3. Dr.ShibSekharDatta, Prof. and Head, Department of Community Medicine, Tripura Medical College &Dr. BRAM Teaching Hospital Agartala, 799014,Tripura 
4. Dr. Abhishek V Raut, Professor, Department of Community Medicine, Mahatma Gandhi Institute of Medical Sciences, Sevagram, 442102, Maharashtra 
 
Ophthalmology 
Chairperson: Dr Viswamithra P, Professor of Ophthalmology, GMC, Paderu, Former HOD of Ophthalmology, Andhra Medical College, Faculty, NMC Regional Centre, Addl 
DME& Superintendent, GGH, Paderu, ASR District-Pin Code 531024, Andhra Pradesh .

94  
Members: 
1. Dr.Radha Ishwar Dass, Associate professor, Ophthalmology, M P Shah govt medical college. Jamnagar, Gujarat. 
2. Dr. K. Kavitha, Professor & Head of Ophthalmology, Madurai Medical college, Madurai, 62t5017, Tamil Nadu 
3. Dr.Jisha K, Professor, Department of Ophthalmology, Govt Medical college, Gandhinagar, PO Kottayam 68600Kerala 
4. Dr. Nitin Nema, Professor in Department of Ophthalmology, and Convener, NMC Regional Center for MET, Sri Aurobindo Medical College & Postgraduate Institute, 
Indore, 453555, Maharashtra 
5. Dr.Suneetha N, Professor and Head, Dept of Ophthalmology, St John's Medical College, Bangalore 560034, Karnataka 
 
 
Otorhinolaryngology 
Chairperson: Dr. T. Indra, Professor of ENT, Member MEU, Madras Medical College, Rajiv Gandhi Government General HospitalChennai.600003, Tamil Nadu 
Members: 
1. Dr. Saurabh Gandhi, Associate Pr ofessor, NHL Municipal Medical College, Faculty, Nodal Center, Ahmedabad, Gujarat 
2. Dr.Vishwambhar Singh, Professor department of Otorhinolaryngology, Institute of Medical Science, Banaras Hindu University, Varanasi 221005, Uttar Pradesh 
3. Dr.SubhabrataSengupta, Professor Department of ENT, Faculty Member NMC Regional Centre, ESIC P GIMSR & Medical College,Joka, 700104, Kolkata 
4. Dr.Sridhara S, Associate professor and head of the department, Shivamogga institute of medical sciences, Shimoga. Karnataka. 
 
General Medicine 
Chairperson: Dr. P.V.Balamurugan, Professor, Department of medi cine, Co-Convenor, NMC Regional Centre, Madurai Medical CollegeMadurai-625020, Tamil Nadu. 
Members: 
1. Dr. Santosh B Salagre, Professor and Unit Head, Department of Medicine, Co-Convenor, NMC Nodal Centre, Seth G S Medical College, Mumbai - 400012, Maharashtra. 
2. Dr.MehjabinHirani, Associate Professor and Unit Head, Department of Medicine, MPSGMC, Jamnagar-361008, Gujarat. 
3. Dr.Sudhir Kumar, Professor and Unit head, Department of General Medicine, Co-convenor, NMC Regional Centre, IGIMS, Patna, Bihar. 
Bihar - 800001. 
4. Dr.NeerajManikath, Assistant professor, Department of Medicine, Member NMC Regional C entre, GMCH Kozhikode, 673008,Kerala. 
Paediatrics 
Chairperson: Dr Jayant Vagha, Professor, Paediatrics, JNMC, Wardha, 442001, Maharashtra, 
Members: 
1. Dr.Kundan Mittal, Professor, Pediatrics, PGIAMS, Rohtak, Haryana. 
2. Dr.MunishKakkar, Professor and Head, Pediatrics, MGUMST, Jaipur, Rajasthan. 
3. Dr. Kumar Angadi, Associate Professor and HOD, Pediatrics, YIMS, Yadgir, Karnataka.

95  
Psychiatry 
Chairperson: Dr. Sujata Sethi, Senior Professor, Department of Psychiatry & Co-convenor NMC Regional Center, Pt. B.D. Sharma PGIMS, Rohtak 124001, Haryana 
Members: 
1. Dr. Rajesh Kumar, Professor and Head, Department of Psychiatry , IGIMS Patna 800014, Bihar 
2. Dr.BheemsainTekkalaki, Associate Professor, Department of Psychiatry, Faculty, NMC Regional Center, KAHER’s J. N Medical College, Belagavi, 590010 Karnataka 
3. Dr.Smitha C A, Associate Professor, Department of Psychiatry,  Faculty, NMC Regional Centre, Govt. Medical College Kozhikode – 673008, Kerala 
4. Dr.Nilima Shah, Associate Professor, Department of Psychiatry, Faculty, NMC Regional Centre, NHL Municipal Medical College, Ah medabad 380006, Gujarat 
Dermatology, Venereology & Leprosy 
Chairperson: Dr Abhilasha Williams, Professor of Dermatology, Vice Principal- UG Academics, Member, NMC Nodal Center for Medical Education, Christian Medical College 
& Hospital, Ludhiana, 141008, Punjab. 
Members: 
1. Dr.Ishwara Bhat, Professor of Dermatology, Member, NMC Nodal Ce nter for Medical Education, St John’s Medical College Hospital, Bangalore. 560034, Karnataka 
2. Dr.C.Dharmambal, Professor of DVL, CC member MMC – Regional center, Rajiv Gandhi Govt.General Hospital, Madras Medical College, Chennai – 600003, Tamil Nadu 
3. Dr. Chaitanya Namdeo, Professor, Department of Dermatology, Venereology & Leprosy, Sri Aurobindo Medical College & PGI, Indore 453555, Maharashtra 
Obstetrics & Gynaecology 
Chairperson: Dr. Anju Agarwal, Professor and Head, Department of Ob/Gyn, KGMU, Lucknow, Member, NMC Nodal Centre, King George Medical University, Lucknow 
226003 , Uttar Pradesh 
Members: 
1. Dr.Isukapalli Vani, Professor and Head, Department of OBG, co-Convenor, NMC regional Centre, Andhra Medical College, Visakhapatnam- 530002, Andhra Pradesh 
2. Dr.M. LaxmiPrasanna, Professor and HOD, OBG department, GGH, NIZAMABAD, 503001, Telangana. 
3. Dr.SamratChakrabarti, Associate Professor, Medical College Kolkata, 88, College Street,Kolkata-700073,West Bengal 
 
General Surgery 
Chairperson: Dr Shailesh Kumar, Director Professor of surgery, ABVIMS Dr RML Hospital New Delhi.110001 
Members: 
1. Dr. C Gangalakshmi, MS, Professor of General Surgery, Madurai Medical College, Madurai, Tamil Nadu 
2. Dr.Satyendra Kumar Tiwary, Professor, Institute of Medical Sciences, Banaras Hindu University, Varanasi, Uttar Pradesh 
3. Dr. K Rojaramani, Professor of General surgery, Sri Venkateswara medical college, Tirupati Andhra Pradesh

96  
4. Dr. D. Mohan Das, M.S., Principal/Additional Director Of Medical Medication, Government Medical College,Narsampet, Warangal District, Telangana 
 
Orthopaedics 
Chairperson: Dr Gyaneshwar Tonk, Professor & Head, Department of orthopaedics, Member MEU, LLRM Medical college, Meerut, Uttar Pradesh 
Members: 
1. Dr. G V S Moorthy, Professor & Head, Department of Orthopaedics, Bhaskara Medical College, Telangana 
2. Dr. S K Saidapur, Professor Orthopaedics, JNMC, Belagavi, Karnataka 
3. Dr.Umesh Yadav, Associate Professor, Department of Orthopaedics, PGI, Rohtak, Haryana 
4. Dr.Vijendra Chauhan, Professor Orthopaedics & Director General, Academic Development SRHU, Ex Vice Chancellor and & Dean, HIMS, Baniyawala Jolly Grant, 
Dehradun, Uttarakhand 
 
Anaesthesiology 
Chairperson:Dr. G. Madhavi, Associate Professor, Department of Anaesthesiology, Member, Curriculum committee, Faculty, NMC Regional Centre, Gandhi Medical 
College, Secunderabad-500003, Telangana. 
Members: 
1. Dr.Dhrubajyoti Sarkar, Professor & Head, Department of Anaesthesiology, Member,MEU, College of Medicine & JNM Hospital, Kalyani- 741235 West Bengal. 
2. Dr. Prashant Kumar, Professor, Department of Anaesthesiology, Member, NMC Regional Centre, Pt BD Sharma PGIMS, Rohtak-124001, Haryana. 
3. Dr. Radhika. K. P., Professor, Department of Anaesthesiology, Member, Curriculum committee, Member, Institutional Research committee, Govt Medical College, Kozhikode 
-673008, Kerala. 
 
 
Radiodiagnosis 
 
Chairperson: Dr SubathraAdithan, Additional Professor, Department of Radiodiagnosis, Faculty, NMC Nodal Centre, Jawaharlal Institute of Postgraduate Medical Education and 
Research (JIPMER), Puducherry – 605006 
 
Member: 
1. Dr. Gaurav Mishra, Professor, Department of Radiodiagnosis, Jawaharlal Nehru Medical College; Pro Vice Chancellor, DattaMeghe Institute of Higher Education and 
Research (deemed to be university), Wardha – 442001 Maharashtra  
2. Dr. Ila Dushyant Desai, Professor and Head, Department of Radiodiagnosis, BJ Medical College and Civil hospital, Ahmedabad – 380016 Gujarat

97  
3. Dr. Ashish Verma, Professor, Department of Radiodiagnosis and Imaging, Institute of Medical Sciences, Banaras Hindu University, Varanasi – 221005 Uttar Pradesh